---
title: "Part 1 - Introduction to Thermodynamics"
date: 2022-11-24T17:57:38+01:00
math: true
school: [Physics for engineers]
---
In my physics course we have recently started covering thermodynamics.

It's quite overwhelming but at the same time it's really fun. So I'll just post and explain everything I learn in class here -
since it's a good way of learning, explaining. As the late and incredible Richard Feynman once said,

> *If you cannot explain something in simple terms, you don't understand it* - Richard Feynman

With that said, into thermodynamics!

## Thermodynamics and Theory of Heat

### Thermal Efficiency

Let's start with something which is quite simple to understand. The famous quote that,

> "Energy is neither created nor destroyed, only changed from one form to another".

With this in mind we understand that we never 'create' energy. It's also a sensible conclusion that if we had machines with 100% efficiency,
we wouldn't have whole fields in physics about energy-efficiency.

#### Informal definition of thermal efficiency
(We will later define a more formal definition of thermal efficiency)

$$
y = kx + m
$$

:::example
A usual car that runs on gas has an efficiency of $\approx 20-25\%$ ($e \approx 0.2 - 0.25$)
:::

### Thermal expansion
Imagine we have a block of some kind of material. If we apply heat to this block it's natural that it will expand.
The same logic goes if we lower the heat/temperature - it will compress instead.

#### Formula for Thermal Expansion
$$
L = L_0 (1 + \alpha \Delta T),
$$
where $\alpha$ is called the **expansion coefficient** with unit(s) $[K^{-1}]$.

This is for a 1D expansion, if the expansion happens in 2D it is,

$$
L = L_0 (1 + \beta \Delta T)
$$

where $\beta$ is the expansion coefficient for 2D expansion.
**Note**, $\beta \approx 2\alpha$ is only true for most metals, not all materials.

### Thermal Conductivity for Simple Geometric Objects
Say if we have a system of 2 bodies, one which gains energy/heats up from an external source, with an opening to the second body.

This will transfer the heat from the hot body $T_h$ to the colder body $T_c$ since some heat will be lost in the transfer.
The opening has a so-called thermal conductivity, the ability to transfer heat. With this in mind we can derive,

$$
P = \frac{dQ}{dt} = Ak \frac{T_h - T_c}{l},
$$
where,

$$
\begin{align*}
P & - \text{Effect } [W] \newline
Q & - \text{Heat exchange } [J] \newline
A & - \text{Cross-sectional Area} \newline
k & - \text{Thermal Conductivity } [\frac{W}{mK}] \newline
l & - \text{Length of the opening}
\end{align*}
$$

We can rewrite this also as,
$$
P = -Ak \ \frac{dT}{dx},
$$
or more generally,

$$
P = -Ak \ \nabla T
$$

### Thermal Conductivity for more Complex Geometric Objects
For more complex geometric shapes, we need to consider how the thickness of the body increases/decreases. For example, for a cylinder, the formula becomes,

$$
P = -\underbrace{A}_{2\pi lr} k \ \frac{dT}{dr} = 2\pi lr \cdot k \ \frac{dT}{dr}.
$$

If we're looking at a cylinder that generates heats in its core for example, being near the core (small inner radius) will obviously be warmer than being at its surface (larger inner radius).
Since $2\pi l$ is always constant -- we can rewrite the equation and integrate both sides to get,

$$
\int_{T_h}^{T_c} -\frac{2\pi l\ \cdot k}{P} = \int_{R_1}^{R_2} \frac{dr}{r} \Rightarrow P =  \frac{2\pi k l}{\ln(\frac{R_2}{R_1})} (T_h - T_c),
$$
where $R_1$ and $R_2$ are two inner-radii to the cylinder.

Suppose we have a system which upholds a certain temperature $T_i$ with a constant effect of $P$ -- Now consider if we cut the constant effect of heat, $P$
and let the system naturally cool down due to its surrounding temperature being $T_c$.

We can describe this relation with the following,
$$
dQ = -cm \ dT,
$$
where $c$ is the conductivity coefficient and $m$ is the mass of the substance.

With a bit of rewriting and integrating we also get,
$$
\int_{T_1}^{T_2} \frac{dT}{T - T_0} = \int_0^t \frac{-Ak}{lcm} dt \Rightarrow  \ln(\frac{T_2 - T_0}{T_1 - T_0}) = -\frac{Ak}{lcm}t.
$$

### What Thermal Conductivity really means
Just so we understand the equation $Q = cm \Delta T$ --
the $c$ coefficient tells us how much energy we need to put into a substance to change its temperature.
For example, $\approx 4180 J$ are required to increase the temperature of 1 kg of water by 1 'kelvin'.
Often we can use $^\circ$C as well - but this is due to the difference between two temperature being absolute.
So really it's an increase in any kind of temperature, just by **1** index.

### Latent Heat
Last thing we're about to cover is the so-called **Latent heat** release of required to transition from one phase to another.

The formula for how much energy is needed is,

$$
Q = mL
$$

Where $L$ is the specific latent heat for a particular substance with units $[J/kg]$.

### Conclusion
This was everything for the first part of the thermodynamics,
next time we'll look into how gases behave and why they are so important for thermodynamics.
