---
title: "Part 7 - Poisson Processes I"
date: 2025-11-26
school: [Stochastic Processes and Bayesian Inference]
---
## Introduction
In this part we will introduce Poisson processes and their properties.

## Poisson Processes
:::intuition[Poisson Processes]
In the beginning, we defined a stochastic process as a collection $\{X_t, t \in \mathcal{I}\}$ of random variable with a common state space $\mathcal{S}$.
Initially, the state space was discrete (i.e., finite or countable), last time we extended this  to continuous state spaces.

In this part, we will extend even further and make the set $\mathcal{I}$ is a non-countable set, for example, all positive real numbers, or all subsets of $\mathbb{R}^2$.
:::

:::intuition[Poisson Process]
A random variable with valuyes $0, 1, 2, \ldots$ with a Poisson distribution can be used to model the count of events happening independently, e.g., within some time interval.

We know that if $X \sim \mathrm{Poisson}(\lambda)$, then,
$$
\pi(x) = e^{-\lambda} \frac{\lambda^x}{x!},
$$
and,
$$
\mathbb{E}[X] = \lambda, \quad \mathrm{Var}(X) = \lambda.
$$
A Poisson process models not only the count for a specific time interval, but also the exact time of every event.
:::

:::definition[Counting Process]
A counting process $\{N_t\}_{t \in \mathcal{I}}$ is a stochastic process where $\mathcal{I} = \mathbb{R}_0^+$, where the state space is the non-negative integers, and where $0 \leq s \leq t$ implies $N_s \leq  N_t$.

Generally, when $s < t, N_t - N_s$ counts the number of "events" (in the loose meaning "things happening") in $(s, t]$.

A realization of $N_t$ is then a function of $t$ that is a right-continuous step function.
:::

::::definition[Poisson Process I]
A Poisson process $\{N_t\}_{t \geq 0}$ with parameter $\lambda > 0$ is a counting process, fulfilling,
1. $N_0 = 0$.
2. $N_t \sim \mathrm{Poisson}(\lambda t)$ for all $t > 0$.
3. Stationary Increments: $N_{t + s} - N_s$ has the same distribution as $N_t$ for all $s > 0, t > 0$.
4. Independent Increments: $N_t - N_s$ and $N_r - N_q$ are independent, when $0 \leq q < r \leq s < t$.
:::note
It is not obvious that such a process necessarily exists. Further, $\mathbb{E}[N_t] = \lambda t$, thus what one is counting occurs with a rate of $\lambda$ items per time unit.
:::
::::

::::example[Poisson Process Example I]
Messages are sent to a computer server at a rate of 7 messages per minute.
Assuming a Poisson process $\{N_t\}_{t \geq 0}$, after 3 minutes 22 messages have arrived.

What is the probability of at least 18 messages arriving in the next 2 minutes?
:::solution
We first note that,
$$
\begin{align*}
P(N_5 - N_3 \geq 18 \mid N_3 = 22) & = P(N_5 - N_3 \geq 18 \mid N_3 - N_0 = 22) \newline
& = P(N_5 - N_3 \geq 18) \newline
& = P(N_2 \geq 18) \newline
& = 1 - P(N_2 \leq 17) \newline
\end{align*}
$$
Since $N_2 \sim \mathrm{Poisson}(\lambda t = 7 \cdot 2 = 14)$, we have,
$$
1 - \sum_{k = 0}^{17} e^{-14} \frac{14^k}{k!} = 0.172.
$$
Equivalently, in `R`, `1 - ppois(17, lambda = 14)`.
:::
::::

::::example[Poisson Process Example II]
Customers arrive at a rate of 6 customers per hour to a restaurant.
Assuming a Poisson process $\{N_t\}_{t \geq 0}$, what is the probability that exactly 10 customers arrive after 2 hours and a total of 22 customers have arrived after 4 hours?
:::solution
We first note that,
$$
\begin{align*}
P(N_2 = 10, N_4 = 22) & = P(N_2 - N_0 = 10, N_4 - N_2 = 12) \newline
& = P(N_2 - N_0 = 10) P(N_4 - N_2 = 12) \newline
& = P(N_2 = 10) P(N_2 = 12) \newline
\end{align*}
$$
Since $N_2 \sim \mathrm{Poisson}(\lambda t = 6 \cdot 2 = 12)$, we have,
$$
\left(e^{-12} \frac{12^{10}}{10!}\right) \left(e^{-12} \frac{12^{12}}{12!}\right) = 0.01199
$$
Equivalently, in `R`, `(dpois(10, lambda = 12)) * (dpois(12, lambda = 12))`.
:::
::::

### Exponential Distribution and Poisson Processes
::::recall[Exponential Distribution]
A random variable $X$ with non-negative real values as possible values has an exponential distribution with parameter $\lambda$ if the density is,
$$
\pi(x) \coloneqq \lambda e^{-\lambda x}.
$$
The cumulative probability distribution is,
$$
F(x) \coloneqq 1 - e^{-\lambda x}.
$$
The expectation is and variance are,
$$
\mathbb{E}[X] = \frac{1}{\lambda}, \quad \mathrm{Var}(X) = \frac{1}{\lambda^2}.
$$
:::note[Memoryless of the Exponential Distribution]
A random variable $X$ is called memoryless if,
$$
P(X > s + t \mid X > s) = P(X > t)
$$
for all $s > 0, t > 0$.
:::

The exponential distribution is memoryless, and is the only memoryless continuous random variable.
Thus, we need to take this into consideration when modeling waiting times.
::::

### Equivalent Definitions of Poisson Processes
::::definition[Poisson Process II]
Let $X_1, X_2, \ldots$ be a sequence of i.i.d. exponential random variables with parameter $\lambda$.
Let $N_0 = 0$ and, for $t > 0$,
$$
N_t \coloneqq \max\{n : X_1 + \ldots + X_n \leq t\}.
$$
Then, $\{N_t\}_{t \geq 0}$ is a Poisson process with parameter $\lambda$.
:::proof
Firstly, if we start with a Poisson process (definition I), and let $X_1, X_2, \ldots$ be the inter-arrival times, i.e., the time between event 1 and event 2, event 2 and event 3, etc., then these are i.i.d. exponential random variables with parameter $\lambda$.
Thus, $N_t$ will be defined as above.

Conversely, if we construct $N_t$ as above, all properties of definition I can be verified.

Let $\{M_t\}_{t \geq 0}$ be defined as $M_t \coloneqq N_{t + s} - N_s$ for some $s > 0$.
- It is a counting process by definition.
- $N_0 = 0$ by definition.
- Stationary increments follow from the memoryless property of the exponential distribution: $M_k = N_{s + t + k} - N_{s + t} = \max\{n : X_{N_{s + t} + 1} + \ldots + X_{N_{s + t} + n} \leq k\}$, which has the same distribution as $N_k$.
- Independent increments follow from the independence of the $X_i$'s.
- $M_k = M_{k + s} - N_s = \max\{n : X_{N_s + 1} + \ldots + X_{N_s + n} \leq k\}$, which has a $\mathrm{Poisson}(\lambda k)$ distribution.
:::

We call $S_n \coloneqq X_1 + \ldots + X_n$ the arrival times of the process.
Let $M = \min\{X_1, \ldots, X_n\}$, where, independently for each $i$, $X_i \sim \mathrm{Exponential}(\lambda_i)$, then,
$$
M \sim \mathrm{Exponential}(\lambda_1 + \ldots + \lambda_n), \quad P(M = X_k) = \frac{\lambda_k}{\lambda_1 + \ldots + \lambda_n}.
$$
:::proof
Since the $X_i$'s are independent,
$$
\begin{align*}
P(X_1 > t) P(X_2 > t) \ldots P(X_n > t) & = e^{-\lambda_1 t} e^{-\lambda_2 t} \ldots e^{-\lambda_n t} \newline
& = e^{-(\lambda_1 + \ldots + \lambda_n) t} \newline
\end{align*}
$$
Thus, $M \sim \mathrm{Exponential}(\lambda_1 + \ldots + \lambda_n)$.
:::

Further,
$$
\begin{align*}
P(M = X_1) & = P(X_2 \geq X_1, \ldots, X_n \geq X_1) \newline
& = \mathbb{E}[\mathbb{I}[X_2 \geq X_1, \ldots, X_n \geq X_1]] \newline
& = \mathbb{E}[\mathbb{E}[\mathbb{I}[X_2 \geq X_1, \ldots, X_n \geq X_1] \mid X_1]] \newline
& = \mathbb{E}[P(X_2 \geq X_1, \ldots, X_n \geq X_1 \mid X_1)] \newline
& = \mathbb{E}[e^{-\lambda_2 X_1} \ldots e^{-\lambda_n X_1} \mid X_1] \newline
& = \mathbb{E}[e^{-(\lambda_2 + \ldots + \lambda_n) X_1}] \newline
& = \int_{0}^{\infty} e^{-(\lambda_2 + \ldots + \lambda_n) x} \lambda_1 e^{-\lambda_1 x} \ dx \newline
& = \lambda_1 \int_{0}^{\infty} e^{-(\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \ldots + \lambda_n) x} \ dx \newline
& = \frac{\lambda_1}{\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \ldots + \lambda_n} \underbrace{\left[-\frac{1}{\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \ldots + \lambda_n} e^{-(\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \ldots + \lambda_n) x}\right]_{0}^{\infty}}_{= 1} \newline
& = \frac{\lambda_1}{\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \ldots + \lambda_n} \ _\blacksquare
\end{align*}
$$
::::

:::definition[Poisson Process III]
A Poisson process $\{N_t\}_{t \geq 0}$ with parameter $\lambda > 0$ is a counting process, fulfilling,
- $N_0 = 0$.
- The process has stationary and independent increments.
$$
\begin{align*}
P(N_h = 0) & = 1 - \lambda h + o(h) \newline
P(N_h = 1) & = \lambda h + o(h) \newline
P(N_h > 1) & = o(h) \newline
\end{align*}
$$
for all $h > 0$, where $o(h)$ is a function such that $\lim_{h \to 0} \frac{o(h)}{h} = 0$.
:::
