---
title: "Part 7 - Floating-point arithmetic"
date: 2023-04-25T15:18:21+02:00
math: true
school: [computer system engineering]
---
In this part we'll cover some basics for floating-point arithmetic.

### Integer addition
Just some basics:

* When performing addition
    * **Overflow** if:
        * Adding a positive and negative operand - no overflow.
        * Adding two positive operands - if the carry-out bit is 1.
        * Adding two negative operands - if the carry-out bit is 0.
* When performing subtraction:
    * **Overflow** if:
        * Subtracting two positive or negative operands - no overflow.
        * Subtracting a positive from a negative operand - overflow if the **results sign bit is 0**.
        * Subtracting a negative from a positive operand - overflow if the **results sign bit is 1**.

### Multiplication
We will not cover how to perform binary multiplication - but it's the same principle as decimal multiplication.

However, let's cover the multiplication instructions that we can use in MIPS.

In MIPS, we have two 32-bit registers for the product that is generated by multiplication.

`$HI`: 32 most significant bits.

`$LO`: 32 least significant bits.

With the instructions:
```
# 64-bits product in HI/LO
mult rs, rt
multu rs, rt

# "Move from HI/LO" to rd
mfhi rd
mflo rd

# Least significant 32-bits of product -> rd
mul rd, rs, rt
```

### Division
We will not cover division as well - but there are methods, the "usual" way we are thought - but also restoring division - which we cover [here](https://rezvan.xyz/school/eda322/eda322_5/).

Now, `$HI` and `$LO`, also store the result after division.

`$HI`: 32-bit remainder
`$LO`: 32-bit quotient

```
div rs, rt
divu rs, rt

mfhi rd
mflo rd
```

One thing that we'll need to remember is that - there is no divide-by-0 control. This must be implemented either at hardware level, or as an exception routine.

### Floating-point representation
The standard for floating-point representation is the IEEE Std 754-1985.
This is also important for portability of code.

There are two representations, one for single precision (32-bit), and one for double precision (64-bit):
$$
x = (-1)^S \cdot\ (1 + Fraction) \cdot\ 2^{Exponent - Bias}
$$

Our sign bit, S, is always 1 bit. For the fraction part, it is 23 and 52-bits respectively for single or double precision.
The exponent is 8 and 11-bits respectively.

We always have a normalized fraction, meaning we always have the format `1.frac`.

We've covered this in good detail in the same post I linked earlier.

### Floating-point in MIPS
Floating-point operations are handled by the Co-processor 1.

We also have separate floating-point registers, all of which are of 32-bit size.
For double precision, we use them pairwise - meaning `\$f0/$f1` will be one 64-bit floating-point number.

For floating-point load and store we use:
```
# Eqv to l.s, l.d, s.s, s.d
lwc1, ldc1, swc1, sdc1
```

For arithmetic:
```
add.s, sub.s, mul.s, div.s
```

The same goes for double precision:
```
add.d,.dub.d, mul.d, div.d
```

Compares and branches:
```
# condition can be eq, lt etc.
c.condition.s, c.condition.d

bc1t, bc1f
```

It sets a special floating-point condition bit, therefore, the branches take no operands.
