---
title: "Part 3 - AI Tools"
date: 2025-02-04
school: [Design of AI systems]
---
## Introduction
When dealing with the machine learning life cycle, we will encounter,

1. Data collection (Collect user ratings).
2. Data representation & Processing (Preprocess files, `movie_reviews.csv`).
3. Modelling (Collaborative filtering, Content-based filtering).
4. Learning/Optimization (Minimizing empirical risk of predicting ratings).
5. Evaluation (Online A/B testing [^1]).
6. Deployment (`git add . && git commit -m "LGTM" && git push origin master -f`).

At each of these steps we use different tools, but first let's define what an AI tool is.

### What is an AI tool?
When we are talking about AI tools, we are not talking about AI-assisted tools, rather, tools that helps us implement AI systems.

The specifics depend (obviously) on the **nature** of the system.

We will focus on (statistical) **machine learning** for **prototyping** in **Python**.

## Data Representation & Processing
In typical machine learning systems, our data is stored in matrix and or vector form, e.g., a classical table of features $X$ and labels $Y$.

However, more **general data usually does not have natural tabular representation**.
Think of **time series**, they must cover different time-scales, different lengths and different possible events.

Image data is also not easily stored in (2D) matrices, instead we work with **tensors**.
We usually just think of them as 3D (or higher) matrices, where each depth dimension represents a different color channel.

Graphs are used to represent **relations** of people, atoms, cities, etc.
These can be represented as **adjacency matrices**.

However (again), despite the different nature of text, images, etc., we can still (usually) store them in matrix and vector form.

### But why matrices?
Because (almost) all of machine learning relies on **linear algebra**,

1. **Linear Regression** $y = \beta^T x + c$.
2. **Deep neural networks** $h_{l + 1} = \sigma(W_{l + 1} h_l + b_{l})$.
3. **Linear Programming** $$\begin{aligned} \min & \quad Ax + b \newline \text{subject to } & \quad Bx + c \leq 0 \end{aligned}$$.

Matrix and vector operations are **fast** (enough) and well-studied.

#### Drawbacks & Data Frames
A major drawback of pure matrix and tensor representations is that columns and rows are **anonymous**.
Sometimes we want to know what each row or column represents (explicitly).

**Data frames** add indices and names, much like a spreadsheet.

## Missing Values
Say that we want to predict **cardiovascular risk** for patients who visit their general practitioner.

We look at electronic health records (EHR) data containing age, sex, weight and cholesterol levels $X$ and the corresponding cardiovascular risk $Y$.

When training our machine learning model, inputs are often assumed to be fully observed, but in reality, **it is very common for some features to be missing**.

Let $\tilde{X}$ be the actual observed values (which is a subset of the full feature $X$).

We can represent missing values by a **missingness mask** $M$.

Thus, we can do,

$$
\tilde{X_{ij}} =
\begin{cases}
X_{ij} & \text{if } M_{ij} = 0 \newline
\texttt{nan} & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

Now, suppose we want to *learn* to predict $Y$ from our tabular features $X$, what can we do with our missing values in $X$?

There are two common solutions **imputation** and **informative missingness**.

### Imputation
Attempt to *impute* missing values,

1. Reconstruct $X$ from $\tilde{X}$.
2. Predict $Y$ from reconstructed $\hat{X}$.

Any method that works (well) for $X$ works (well) for our reconstructed $\hat{X}$.

### Informative Missingness
Make use of missingness itself,

1. Predict $Y$ from both $\tilde{X}$ and $M$.

From here we can do two more common approaches,

* Method sensitive to $M$ (e.g., XGBoost [^2]).
* Simple imputation + missing indicators.

### Single VS. Multiple Imputation
The basic idea of *imputation* is to predict the missing value from observed values of other variables.
In the simplest case, we use a single imputation of each value,

$$
f(\text{Age}, \text{Sex}, \text{Weight}) = \text{Cholesterol}
$$

The imputation functions can be learned by regression on complete observations or observations with less missingness,

$$
f^{\star} = \arg \min_{f} \mathbb{E} \left[ \left( f(\text{Age}, \text{Sex}, \text{Weight}) - \text{Cholesterol} \right)^2 \right]
$$

This becomes tricky when all observations have *some* missing values.

A more popular method for imputation is **M**ultiple **I**mputation by **C**hained **E**quations, or MICE.

**M**ultiple **I**mputation: Create more than one sample of each missing value to account for variance.

**C**hained **E**quations: Impute one value based on imputations of other variables, works without any complete observations.

1. Give each variable a placeholder imputed value (e.g., mean)
2. Repeat for a number of iterations
3. $\quad$ For each variable $v$:
4. $\quad$ $\quad$ Regress observed $v$ on other variables in the dataset (including other imputed values)
5. $\quad$ $\quad$ Impute missing $v$ using regression.

However, imputation methods may fail when data is not **m**issing **a**t **r**andom (MAR), i.e., missing values can not be reliably imputed.

A common method in this case is to stitch a simple imputation $\hat{X}$ (e.g., 0) and $M$, as binary indicators, together for prediction.

When do we use which method?

1. Will data be missing at test/use time?
    - &rarr; Imputation is not necessary to minimize test error.
2. Are you fitting a parametric model (e.g., linear regression)?
    - &rarr; Imputation becomes important to recover parameters.
3. Is missingness predictable from observed values (MAR)?
    - &rarr; If not, imputation will lead to biased results.

## Model Development
A big development pattern in machine learning systems is the **fit, predict, score** pattern.

This standardizes the common machine learning **workflow**,

1. `fit(x, y)`: Train model to e.g., predict $y$ from $x$.
2. `predict(x)`: Predict $y$ for $x$.
3. `score(x, y)`: Evaluate model on data $x, y$.

### `fit(x, y)`
The function `fit(x, y)` is responsible for training and storing model parameters that maximize (or minimize) some objective function.

For example, finding the optimal coefficients in OLS or k-NN.

Our arguments $x,y$ **may vary** depending on our application, in **unsupervised learning** there is no $y$, but parameters to fit.

### `predict(x)`
The function `predict(x)` should take a (new) data point $x$ and predict the corresponding outcome (e.g., label/cluster) $y$ for it.

### `score(x, y)`
The function `score(x, y)` assigns a score to the prediction made for $x$ in comparison to the label $y$.

`score(x, y)` can also be used for **hyperparameter selection**, for example using cross-validation.

### Data Preprocessing
All algorithms are **sensitive to the representation** of the input data.

A (trivial) example are the coefficients of OLS, which depend on the **scale of the covariates**,

$$
y = \beta^T(ax) + c = (a \beta)^T x + c.
$$

A common step is to **standardize** features, i.e., to make them have zero mean and unit variance,

$$
X^{(i)} \leftarrow \frac{X - \mu(X)}{\sigma(X)}.
$$

Formally, $\mu$ and $\sigma$ are **parameters**, they are functions of our training data.

### Differentiable Systems
When we fit a machine learning algorithm on a training dataset, we are solving an optimization problem.

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is the most common optimization problem in machine learning.

:::definition[Empirical Risk Minimization]
Given a loss function $L$, a model $f_{\theta}$ with parameters $\theta$, and training data $\{(x^{(i)}, y^{(i)})\}_{i=1}^{N}$, empirical risk minimization is the problem,
$$
\underset{\theta}{\min} \ \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i = 1}^{N} L(f_{\theta}(x^{(i)}), y^{(i)}).
$$
:::

Deep learning and many other AI tools are based on **ERM** in **differentiable systems**.
Systems where the objective function is differentiable in the parameters $\theta$ (this means that learning using gradient descent is possible).

### Gradient Descent
Consider the **linear model** $f(x) = \theta^T x$ of a 1D label y.

We can measure our error using the **mean squared error** (MSE),

$$
\hat{R}(\theta) = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i = 1}^{N} (\theta^T x^{(i)} - y^{(i)})^2.
$$

How do we find the parameters $\theta^{\star}$ that minimize $\hat{R}(\theta)$?

We can use **gradient descent** to find a (local) minimum.

:::definition[Gradient Descent]
Gradient descent iteratively moves in the direction of $-\nabla \hat{R}(\theta)$,
$$
\theta_k \leftarrow \theta_{k - 1} - \eta \nabla_{\theta} \hat{R}(\theta_{k - 1}),
$$

with step size $\eta > 0$.
:::

Here the gradient is,

$$
\nabla_{\theta} \hat{R}(\theta) = \frac{2}{N} \sum_{i = 1}^{N} x^{(i)} (\theta^T x^{(i)} - y^{(i)}).
$$

However, gradient descent only has **one non-trivial operation**, computing the gradient itself.

As long as $\hat{R}$ is a composition of differentiable functions of $\theta$, differentiation is easy, this is what we exploit in modern machine learning (backpropagation).

[^1]: [A/B testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A/B_testing)
[^2]: [XGBoost](https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
