---
title: "Part 6 - Elasticity"
date: 2024-10-18 23:15:00
school: [microelectromechanical systems]
---
### Stress and Strain
When a force is applied to an elastic body, the body **deforms**.
The way in which the body deforms depends upon **the type of force** applied to it.

**Compression** force makes the body **shorter**.
A **tensile force** makes the body **longer**.

Tensile and compressive forces are called **direct forces**

Stress is the **force per unit area** upon which it acts, denoted by $\sigma$.

$$
\sigma = \frac{F}{A} [N/m^2]
$$

We also usually use the unit Pa (Pascal) for stress, which is equivalent to $1 N/m^2$.

In each case, a force $F$ produces a deformation $x$. In engineering, we usually change this force into stress and the deformation into strain denoted by $\epsilon$,

$$
\epsilon = \frac{x}{L} [m/m]
$$

Strain has no unit since it is a ratio of two lengths.

The mechanical properties of materials used in engineering are determined by **experiments** performed on **small specimens**.

These experiments are conducted in laboratories equipped with testing machines capable of **loading** in tension or compression.

### Modulus of elasticity $(E)$
Elastic materials always spring **back** into shape when released.
They also obey **Hoke's Law**.

This is the law of **springs** which states that deformation is directly proportional to the force.

$$
\frac{F}{x} = \text{stiffness} [kN/m]
$$

The stiffness is **different** for the **different material** and different **sizes** of the material.
We may eliminate the size by using stress and strain instead of force and deformation.

Let $F$ be the direct stress and $x$ be the strain,

$$
F = \sigma A \quad \text{and} \quad x = \epsilon L
$$

Therefore,

$$
\frac{F}{x} = \frac{\sigma A}{\epsilon L} \quad \text{and} \quad \frac{FL}{Ax} = \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon}.
$$

This is what we call the **Modulus of Elasticity (E)**,

$$
E = \frac{FL}{Ax} = \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon}.
$$

A graph of stress against strain will be **straight line** with **gradient of $E$**.
The units of $E$ are the same as the unit of stress.

### Shear Strain
Shear stress denoted by $\tau$, is the force per unit area carrying the load.
This means the cross-sectional area of the material being cut, the beam and pin.

$$
\tau = \frac{F}{A} [N/m^2]
$$

The force causes the material to deform as shown.
The **shear strain denoted by $\gamma$, is defined as the **ratio of the distance deformed to the height**.
We can say that,

$$
\gamma = \frac{x}{L}
$$

### modulus of rigidity $(G)$
If we conduct an experiment and measure $x$ for various values of $F$,
we will find that if the material is elastic,
it behaves like a spring and so long as we do not damage the material by using too big force, the graph of $F$ and $x$ is a straight line.

The **gradient** of the graph is constant, so,

$$
\frac{F}{x} = \text{constant}.
$$

This is the spring stiffness of the block in $N/m$.

If we divide $F$ by area $A$ and $x$ by the height $L$, the relationship is still a constant and we get,

$$
G = \frac{\frac{F}{A}}{\frac{x}{L}} = \frac{FL}{Ax} = \frac{\tau}{\gamma} = \text{constant}.
$$

### Poisson's Ratio
For clarity, this physical fact may be restated thus.

If a solid body is subjected to an axial tensionl, it contracts laterally.

On the other hand, the material "squashes out" sideways.

This constant is a definite property of a material called **Poisson's ratio**. It will be denoted by $\nu$ and is defined as,
$$
\nu = \left\vert \frac{\text{lateral strain}}{\text{axial strain}} \right\vert =  - \frac{\text{lateral strain}}{\text{axial strain}}
$$

Homogeneous isotropic linear elastic materials (with a very basic material properties).

$$
G = \frac{E}{2(1 + \nu)}
$$

### Bending Deformation
1. Bending moment causes beam to deform.
2. $x$: longitudinal axis.
3. $y$: axis of symmetry.

Assumptions:
1. Neutral surface - no change in length.
2. All cross-sections remain plane and perpendicular to longitudinal axis.
3. Neglect deformation of cross-section within its own plane.

$$
\epsilon = \lim_{\Delta s \to 0} \frac{\Delta s^{\prime} - \Delta x}{\Delta x} = \lim_{\Delta s \to 0} \frac{(\rho_c - y) \Delta \theta - \rho_c \Delta \theta}{\rho_c \Delta \theta} = - \frac{y}{\rho_c}
$$

$$
\epsilon = - \frac{y}{\rho_c} \epsilon_{\max}
$$

### Bending Stress
From Hooke's Law we can expect that,

$$
\sigma = -\frac{y}{c} \sigma_{\max}
$$

#### Moment-Curvature Relation
$$
m = \int_A y\ dF = \int_A y(-\sigma)\ dA = \int_A y \left(\frac{y}{c} \sigma_{\max}\right)\ dA = \frac{\sigma_{\max}}{c} \int_A y^2\ dA
$$

The last term in our final expression is the **moment of inertia** denoted by $I$.

Therefore, we can obtain,

$$
\sigma = - \frac{My}{I} \rightarrow E\epsilon = - \frac{My}{I} \rightarrow M = - \frac{EI}{\rho_c}
$$

### Deflection Curve
The deflection $v$ *is the displacement in the $y$ direction* of any point on the axis of the beam.

When the beam is bent, there is not only a **deflection** at each point along the axis, but also a **rotation**.

The angle of rotation $\theta$ of the axis of the beam is the angle between the $x$-axis and the **tangent to the deflection curve.**

### Radius of Curvature
The radius of curvature $\rho_c$ has the following relation,

$$
ds = \rho_c\ d\theta \rightarrow \frac{1}{\rho_c} = \frac{d\theta}{ds}.
$$

The slope of the deflection curve is the first derivative $dv/dx$ of the deflection $v$.

$$
\frac{1}{\rho_c} = \frac{\frac{d^2 v}{dx^2}}{\left(1 + \left(\frac{dv}{dx}\right)^2\right)^{3/2}}
$$

for small $dv/dx$,
$$
\frac{1}{\rho_c} \approx \frac{d^2 v}{dx^2}
$$

### The Beam Equations
Hence, we obtain,

$$
M(x) = EI \frac{d^2 y}{dx^2}.
$$

Shear force equation,

$$
V = - \frac{dM}{dx} \rightarrow V = - \frac{d}{dx} \left(EI \frac{d^2 y}{dx^2}\right)
$$

The load equation,
$$
w = - \frac{dV}{dx} \rightarrow w = \frac{d^2}{dx^2} \left(EI \frac{d^2 y}{dx^2}\right)
$$

### An Application of Micro-Beams
* Accelerometers
    - With thick proof-mass
    - Over-range protection by bottom wafer.

### Membrane Structures
Membrane structures are thin structures that are subjected to **tension**.

We use SiO$_2$ as a stop layer and etch mask.


#### Applications of membrane structures
* Micropumps and microvalves
    - KOH etched structrues
    - 4 layers of structures including:
        - Beams (functioning as check valves).
        - A membrane (to provide volume change).
