---
title: "Part 2 - Basic Statistical Concepts and Tools"
date: 2024-09-12
school: [applied statistics]
---
### Basic Statistics
Let's review some basic statistical concepts and tools.

#### Sample Mean
:::definition[Sample Mean]
The sample mean is defined as,
$$
\bar{x} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} x_i
$$
where $x_i$ is the $i$-th observation in the sample.
:::

If we're drawing from a population, the population mean is denoted by $\mathbb{E}(X)$.

In R, we can calculate the sample mean using the `mean()` function.
```r
x <- 1:10
> mean(x)
[1] 5.5

> sum(x)/lengt(x)
[1] 5.5
```

If we assume the components of the data vector are independent and identically distributed, the sample mean is an unbiased estimator of the population mean.

#### Sample Median
The sample median $m$ of $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$ is the middle value of the ordered data set.

Let the sorted data be denoted by $x_{(1)} \leq x_{(2)} \leq \ldots \leq x_{(n)}$. Then,
$$
m = \begin{cases}
x_{k+1} & n = 2k + 1 \text{ (odd)} \newline
\frac{1}{2} (x_{k} + x_{k+1}) & n = 2k \text{ (even)}
\end{cases}
$$

The sample median is simply `median()` in R.
The median is a special kind of **quantile**, which we will talk about later.
Important to note is that the median and mean can differ significantly, especially when the data is *skewed*.

The median is insensitive to a few unusually large or unusually small observations, this is called **robustness**.

#### Sample Variance
:::definition[Sample Variance]
The sample variance is defined as,
$$
s^2 = \frac{1}{n-1} \sum_{i=1}^{n} (x_i - \bar{x})^2
$$
where $\bar{x}$ is the sample mean.
:::

The sample variance is an unbiased estimator of the population variance.

This will give us an overall sense of the variation in the data, as the name suggests.
NB: Remember that, the unit of the variance is squared, so it's not directly interpretable.

In R, we can calculate the sample variance using the `var()` function.

#### Sample Standard Deviation
The sample standard deviation is the square root of the sample variance,
$$
s = \sqrt{s^2} = \sqrt{\frac{1}{n-1} \sum_{i=1}^{n} (x_i - \bar{x})^2}
$$

Unlike the variance, the standard deviation is in the same unit as the data, so it's more interpretable.

In R, we can calculate the sample standard deviation using the `sd()` function.

If we're drawing from a population, the population standard deviation is defined as,
$$
Var(X) = \mathbb{E}[(X - \mathbb{E}(X))^2]
$$

#### Sample Quantile
For $0 \leq p \leq 1$, the $p$-th quantile for the sample is the data at position $\approx pn$ in the sorted data.

Wehn this is not an integer, a weighted average is used.

This value essentially splits the data so that (roughly) $100p\%$ is smaller and $100(1-p)\%$ is larger.
The median is the $0.5$ quantile.

The $p$-th quantile is also called the $100p$-th percentile.

For a population, the $p$-th quantile for a distribution is defined as $F^{-1}(p)$, if $F$ is strictly increasing so that the inverse exists. Otherwise the definition is a little bit more complicated.

In R, we can calculate the quantiles using the `quantile()` function.
```r
quantile(x, 0.25) # 25th percentile
quantile(x, (0.25, 0.75)) # 25th and 75th percentiles
```

##### Quantiles VS. Proportions
For a data vector $x$ we can ask two related but inverse questions.

What proportion of the data is less than or equal to a specified value? Or for a specified proporation, what value has this proportion of the data less than or equal?

The latter question is answered by the quantile function.

#### The inter-quantile range (IQR)
We are interested in the range of the middle 50% of the data, this would be the distance between the 75 percentile and the 25 percentile.
Thus, the IQR is a single number.

In R we can calculate the IQR using the `IQR()` function.

#### Detecting Outliers
An outlier is an observation that is significantly different from other observations in the data set.

A rule of thumb is:
> An observation is an outlier if it is more than $1.5 \times IQR$ from the closest quartile.

Also a good rule to remember is:
> An outlier is said to be *extreme* if it is more than $3 \times IQR$ from the closest quartile.

#### Correlation
:::definition[Pearson Correlation Coefficient]
The *pearson correlation coefficient* $r$ of two data vectors $x$ and $y$ is defined as,
$$
r = cor(x, y) = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (x_i - \bar{x})(y_i - \bar{y})}{\sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (x_i - \bar{x})^2 \sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \bar{y})^2}}
$$
:::

The value of $r$ is between -1 and 1, where 1 indicates a perfect positive linear relationship, -1 indicates a perfect negative linear relationship, and 0 indicates no linear relationship.

:::definition[Population Correlation Coefficient]
For a population, when $(x_i, y_i) \overset{iid}{\sim} F_{XY}$, the population correlation coefficient is defined as,
$$
r = \frac{\mathbb{E}[(X - \mathbb{E}(X))(Y - \mathbb{E}(Y))]}{\sqrt{Var(X)Var(Y)}}
$$
:::

In R, we can calculate the correlation coefficient using the `cor()` function.
NB: This is the *pearson* correlation coefficient, there are other types of correlation coefficients.

###### Properties of the Correlation Coefficient
* The vale of $r$ does not depend on the unit of measurement for each variable.
* The value of $r$ does not depend on which of the two variables are labeled $x$, i.e. it is symmetric.
* The value of $r$ is between -1 and 1.
* The correlation coefficient is:
    - -1 only when all the points lie on a line with a negative slope.
    - 1 only when all the points lie on a line with a positive slope.
* The value of $r$ is a measure of the extent to which $x$ and $y$ are **linearly** related.

#### Modes and Skew
A **mode** of a distribution is a peak, or a local maximum, in its density.

It is a visual effect and has no rigorous mathematical definition.

A data set can be characterized by its number of modes. A *unimodal distribution* has a single mode (e.g Normal distribution), a *bimodal distribution* has two modes, and so on.

The **tail** of a distribution are the very large and very small values of the distribution (NB: This is not the best definition, but it will do for now).

A distribution is called **long-tailed (or heavy-tailed)** if the data set contains values far from the main body of the distribution.

A distribution is **skewed** if one tail is significantly heavier or longer than the other. Good to remember is that the antonym (opposite) of skew is **symmetry**.

A distribution with longer left tail is called **left-skewed** or **negatively skewed**.

Some good rules of thumb:
1. When a distribution is skewed positively (to the right) the mean is larger than the median.

2. When a distribution is skewed negatively (to the left) the mean is smaller than the median.

3. When a distribution is symmetric, the mean and median are equal.

### Distributions
Let's review some basic distributions.

#### Gamma Distribution
:::definition[Gamma Distribution]
A random variable $X$ is said to be gamma distributed with parameters $(\alpha, \beta)$, denoted as $X \sim Gamma(\alpha, \beta)$, if its PDF is given by,
$$
f(x) = \begin{cases}
\frac{\beta^{\alpha} e^{-\beta x} x^{\alpha - 1}}{\Gamma(\alpha)} & x \geq 0 \newline
0 & x < 0
\end{cases}
$$
:::

The gamma function $\Gamma$ is given by,
$$
\Gamma(\alpha) = \int_{0}^{\infty} t^{\alpha - 1} e^{-t} dt.
$$

One important property of $\Gamma$ is that $\Gamma(\alpha) = (\alpha - 1) \Gamma(\alpha - 1)$.

For integer values of $\alpha = n$, $\Gamma(n) = (n-1)!$.

When $\alpha = 1$, the density becomes,
$$
f(x) = \beta e^{-\beta x} \quad x \geq 0
$$

we get the exponential distribution. Thus, $Gamma(1, \beta) = Exp(\beta)$.

With this, if $\alpha = n$ is an integer, $X$ can be written as sum of $n$ i.i.d $Exp(\beta)$ random variables.

$\alpha$ is called the *shape* parameter and $\beta$ is called the *rate* parameter.

The mean and variance of a gamma distribution are given by,
$$
\mathbb{E}(X) = \frac{\alpha}{\beta} \newline
Var(X) = \frac{\alpha}{\beta^2}
$$

In R, we can generate random variables from a gamma distribution using the `rgamma()` function.

#### Beta Distribution
:::definition[Beta Distribution]
A random variable $X$ is said to have a beta distribution if its density is given by,
$$
f(x) = \begin{cases}
\frac{1}{B(\alpha, \beta)} x^{\alpha - 1} (1 - x)^{\beta - 1} & 0 < x < 1 \newline
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$
:::

Where $B(\alpha, \beta)$ is the beta function,
$$
B(\alpha, \beta) = \int_{0}^{1} t^{\alpha - 1} (1 - t)^{\beta - 1} dt
$$

so that $f(x)$ integrates to 1.

The mean and variance of a beta distribution are given by,
$$
\mathbb{E}(X) = \frac{\alpha}{\alpha + \beta} \newline
Var(X) = \frac{\alpha \beta}{(\alpha + \beta)^2 (\alpha + \beta + 1)}
$$

In R, we can generate random variables from a beta distribution using the `rbeta()` function.

#### Chi-Squared Distribution
The $\Chi^2(n)$ or $\Chi^2_n$ distribution is a special case of the gamma distribution, with $\alpha = n/2$ and $\beta = 1/2$.

The integer $n$ is the parameter of the distribution and sometimes called the *degree of freedom* of the distribution.
If $X \sim \Chi^2(n)$, then $\mathbb{E}(X) = n$ and $Var(X) = 2n$.

If $Z_i \overset{iid}{\sim} N(0, 1)$, then $Z_1^2 + Z_2^2 + \ldots + Z_n^2 \sim \Chi^2(n)$.

Property:
> If $X$ and $Y$ are independent with $\Chi^2_n$ and $\Chi^2_m$ distributions, then $X + Y \sim \Chi^2_{n+m}$.

In R, we can generate random variables from a chi-squared distribution using the `rchisq()` function.

#### Student's t-Distribution
We use this t-distribution for CI (confidence intervals) and hypothesis testing. Which we will cover in the next part.

Densitity,
$$
f(x) = \frac{\Gamma(\frac{n+1}{2})}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2}) \sqrt{n\pi}} \left(1 + \frac{x^2}{n}\right)^{-\frac{n+1}{2}}
$$

Mean and variance,
$$
\mathbb{E}(X) = 0 \newline
Var(X) = \frac{n}{n-2} \quad n > 2
$$

If $Z \sim N(0, 1)$, $X \sim \Chi^2_n$, and $X$ and $Z$ are independant, then $\sqrt{n}Z / \sqrt{X/n} \sim t_n$.

$n$ is the parameter of the t-distribution and is called the *degree of freedom*.

A special case is the $t(1)$, it is also called cauchy distribution.

Density for Cauchy,
$$
f(x) = \frac{1}{\pi(1 + x^2)}
$$

In R, we can generate random variables from a t-distribution using the `rt()` function.
For cauchy, we can use the `rcauchy()` function.

<TODO>
