---
title: "Part 7 - Timing, delay & power"
date: 2023-02-08
math: true
school: [digital design]
---
When designing digital circuits, the timing, delay and power usage of the circuit are important.
In this part we'll cover how we usually measure and compare these.

### Timing and delay
In an arbitrary synchronous circuit, we usually have:

* A single-bit clock, all other wires may be multiple bits wide.
* Registers (Which is just a collection of flip-flops).
* The clock will be distributed to all flip-flops
* Combinational logic
    * No internal state
    * Output only a function of input(s)
* Particular inputs/outputs are optional
* Optional feedback(-loops).

So how do we measure the performance/how fast a circuit is? We could do,
operations/sec, or cycles/sec? But we need to know what limits the clock rate and what happens if we increase the clock rate.

If we break this down, what causes delay?

* Logic gate delay
* (Physical) Wire delay
* Delays in flip-flops

Only one of these delays can cause a faulty cycle. Since flip-flops require a setup time and a clock to Q delay.
We can have situations where, if the clock is too fast, the flip-flops output the wrong things.

When analyzing circuits, we only care about the critical path - if the clock is too fast for this path, the whole circuit falls.

There are 4 general cases:

* Input $\to$ CL $\to$ Output
* Input $\to$ CL $\to$ Register
* Register $\to$ CL $\to$ Output
* Register $\to$ CL $\to$ Register

Therefore, in general the clock period, $T$, should be:

T = time(input setup) + time(CL) + time(wire) + time(output setup)

### Gate delay
The time needed for the output of a gate to change from the moment an input of the gate changes depends on:

* Transistor parameters
* Fan-out: how many wires it will drive
* Fan-in: number of inputs of a gate

### Wire Delay
In general, wires behave as the transmission lines,
signal wave-front moves close to the speed of light.

Wire delay is also proportional to the square of its length, $\mathcal{O}(L²)$


### Flip-flop delay
As we earlier covered, flip-flops have a certain delay.

These are:

* Setup time
    * The time the input of a flip-flop needs to be stable,
      before the clock edge to be stored correctly
* Hold time
    * The time the input of a flip-flop needs to be held,
      after the clock edge to be stored correctly
* Propagation time
    * The time a flip-flop needs to propagate a value stored to the output

### Metastability
Asynchronous inputs can be really dangerous, therefore synchronous inputs are preferred.

The solution to this is having a so-called **synchronizer** blocks (usually two registers).

A synchronizer design is characterised by its **M**ean **T**ime **B**etween **F**ailure (MTBF).

There is a nice equation:
$$
MTBF(t_r) = \frac{e^{\frac{t_r}{\tau}}}{T_0 \cdot\ f \cdot\ a}
$$

Where:
$$
t_r = \text{resolution time (clock period - FF setup time)} \newline
T_0, \tau = \text{flip-flop characteristic constants} \newline
f = \text{clock frequency} \newline
a = \text{average input rate of change}
$$

### Power
Time for a bit of math and physics:)

The power supply provides energy for charging and discharging wires and transistor gates.
The energy is stored and dissipated as heat.

Let's remember that:
$$
P = \frac{dE}{dt}
$$

And that, voltage (potential of the charge) is increased the amount of energy,
$dE$, needed to move an amount of charge, $dq$.

$$
V = \frac{dE}{dq}
$$

And *current* is:
$$
I = \frac{dq}{dt}
$$

Then:
$$
\frac{dE}{dt} = \frac{dE}{dq} \cdot\ \frac{dq}{dt} = \boxed{P = V \cdot\ I}
$$

Which means:
$$
E = \int_{-\infty}^t\ P\ dt
$$

Remember that power and energy is not the same in the physics world,
even if we may use them interchangeably in every-day terms.

### Metrics
These are some of the metrics that we usually study in digital circuits

Average power:
$$
P_{avg} = \frac{\Delta E}{\Delta t}
$$

Peak power:
$$
P_{peak} = \max\left(\lim_{\Delta t \rightarrow 0}\ \frac{\Delta E}{\Delta T}\right) = \max\left(\frac{dE}{dt}\right)
$$

One of the most popular metrics is **performance per watt** (measures energy efficiency).
