---
title: "Part 8 - Interfaces and Memory"
date: 2023-02-19
math: true
school: [digital design]
---
In this part we'll cover interfaces, interconnects as well as memory.

### Interface timing
In digital circuits, we often want to send data, from a sender, to a receiver.

How can we achieve this data passing from one module to another?

The answer is:

* Open loop
* Flow Control
* Serialized

In an open loop, we either have so that it's always "valid" to send data, or periodically.

In flow control, as the name suggests, the data-flow is controlled. The sender needs to output a "valid" signal,
and the receiver needs to send a "ready" signal.

Then depending on what kind of control we have, either Push flow or Pull flow.

* Push flow
    * Assume receiver always ready
* Pull flow
    * Assume sender always has valid data

When these signals align in a clock pulse, we can send the data.

Serialization, is the idea that we split up the data into smaller chunks.
When the *frame* signal is active, it means a serial frame is about to start, or in layman terms, the beginning of a new data pack.

Flow control can be at either frame level, or word level.

### Interconnects
In circuits, there is also a need that clients can communicate with each other - how do we achieve this?

The common solution is using a so-called bus. The bus is a shared resource which clients can communicate with each other.

But there are other solutions:

* Crossbar switch
* Interconnection networks

There are a lot of different factors that impact what solution you pick:

* Cost
* Scalability
* \# of connections

Are just a few.

### Memory
We've already seen and worked with memory, so let's refresh what we've covered:

Uses:
* Data & program storage
* General purpose registers
* Buffering
* Lookup tables
* Combinational Logic implementation
* Whenever a large collection of state elements is required.

Types:
* RAM - random access memory
* ROM - read only memory
* EPROM, FLASH - electrically programmable read only memory

What we usually mean by memory though is, many addressable fixed size locations.

$n$ bits allow the addressing of $2^n$ memory locations.
Example: 24 bits can address $2^{24}$ = 16,777,216 locations

If each location holds 1 byte (= 8 bits) then the memory is 16 MB.
If each location holds one word (32 bits = 4 bytes) then it is 64 MB.

Computers are either *byte* or *word* addressable, meaning that each memory location holds either 8 bits (1 byte),
or a full standard *word* for that computer architecture.

* Each bit
    * Is a gated D-latch
* Each location
    * Consists of $w$ bits, either $w = 8$ or $w =$ max width
* Addressing
    * $n$ locations means $log_2(n)$ address bits
    * Decoder circuit translates address into 1 of n locations

Now, let's define some words and terms that we encounter often while working with circuits:

* Bandwidth:
    * Total amount of data across a device or across an interface,
      per unit time (usually Bytes/sec)
* Latency:
    * A measure of the time from a request for a data transfer until the data is received.
* Memory Interfaces for Accessing Data
    * Asynchronous (unclocked):
        * A change in the address results in data appearing
    * Synchronous (clocked):
        * A change in address, followed by an edge on CLK results in data appearing.
            Sometimes, multiple requests may be outstanding.
* Volatile:
    * Looses its state when the power goes off. (the opposite: non-volatile)

Also, just to list out the volatile vs non-volatile list:

* Volatile:
    * Random Access Memory (RAM):
        * DRAM "dynamic"
        * SRAM "static"
* Non-volatile:
    * Read Only Memory (ROM):
        * Mask ROM "mask programmable"
        * EPROM "electrically programmable"
        * EEPROM "erasable electrically programmable"
        * FLASH memory - similar to EEPROM with programmer integrated on chip

Memory blocks can be (and often are) used to implement combinational logic functions.

Examples:
* LUTs in FPGAs
* 1Mbit x 8 EPROM can implement 8 independent functions each of $log_2(1M) = 20$ inputs.
* The decoder part of a memory block can be considered a “minterm generator”.
* The cell array part of a memory block can be considered an OR function over a subset of rows.
