---
title: "Part 12 - Change of variables"
date: 2023-09-22
math: true
school: [mathematical analysis in several variables]
---

### Introduction
In this part we'll cover how to perform change of variables for double and triple integrals, as well as the idea and power with polar coordinates.

### Change of variable
For functions of one variable:

$$
\int_a^b f(g(x))g'(x)\ dx
$$

Let $u = g(x)$ and therefore $du = g'(x)\ dx$.

Then:
$$
\int_{g(a)}^{g(b)} f(u)\ du
$$

But in two variables, this is a bit tricker, we'll have to use polar coordinates.

### Polar coordinates
Instead of describing a point as $(x, y)$ we can describe it using the magnitude (from the origin) and a angle.

$$
r \geq 0 \newline
0 \leq \theta \leq 2\pi
$$

Then:
$$
x = r cos(\theta) \newline
y = r sin(\theta)
$$


#### When to change to polar coordinates
1) If $f$ looks nicer in polar coordinates

**and**

2) $D$ looks nice in polar coordinates

:::example
Say we have the unit circle:
$$
D = \{(x, y) | x^2 + y^2 \leq 1\}
$$

In polar coordinates:
$$
S = \{(r, \theta) | 0 \leq r \leq 1, 0 \leq \theta \leq 2\pi \}
$$

Which is just a rectangle! Which we know how to integrate over!

$$
D = \{(x, y) | 1 \leq x^2 + y^2 \leq 4\}
$$

In polar coordinates:
$$
S = \{(r, \theta) | 1 \leq r \leq 2, 0 \leq \theta \leq 2\pi \}
$$

Or something even more complex:
$$
S = \{(r, \theta) | 0 \leq r \leq 1, \theta_1 \leq \theta \leq \theta_2 \}
$$
:::

### Naive guess
But, how do we change to polar coordinates?

Let's take a naive guess:
$$
\iint_D f(x, y)\ dA = \iint_S f(r cos(\theta), r sin(\theta))\ dA
$$

Let's try!

Given $f(x, y) = 1$ and $D = \{(x,y) | x^2 + y^2 \leq 1\}$.

$$
\iint_D 1\ dA = \text{Area of D} = \pi r^2 = \pi
$$

Polar:
$$
S = \{(r, \theta) | 0 \leq r \leq 1, 0 \leq \theta \leq 2\pi \}
$$

$$
\iint_S 1\ dA = \int_0^{2\pi} \int_0^1 r\ dr\ d\theta = \ldots = \pi
$$

So this doesn't yield the same result.

:::definition[Double integral in polar coordinates]
$$
\iint_S g(r, \theta)\ dA = \iint_S f(r cos(\theta), r sin(\theta)) \cdot r\ dA
$$
:::

:::example
Find $\iint_D x^2(x^2 + y^2)^7\ dA$ where $D$ is the region in the upperhalf plane, bounded by the circles, $x^2 + y^2 =1$ and $x^2 + y^2 = 4$.

$$
S = \{(r, \theta) | 1 \leq r \leq 2, 0 \leq \theta \leq \pi \}
$$

Which means:
$$
\int_0^{\pi} \int_1^2 (r^2 cos^2(\theta) \cdot (r^2)^7) \cdot r\ dA
$$

$$
\int_0^{\pi} \int_1^2 r^{17} cos^2(\theta)\ dr\ d\theta = \ldots = \boxed{\pi}
$$
:::
