---
title: "Part 20 - Divergence and Stokes' Theorem"
date: 2023-10-18
math: true
school: [mathematical analysis in several variables]
---

### Introduction
In this part we'll cover surface integrals over vector fields as well as two very important theorems.


### Surface integrals over vector fields

:::definition[Flux]
Let $S$ be a parametric surface, parameterized by, $\vec{r}: D \rarr \mathbb{R}^2$ and $F: \mathbb{R}^3 \rarr \mathbb{R}^3$, be a vector field. Then:
$$
\iint_S \vec{F} \cdot dS = \iint_D \vec{F}(\vec{r}(u, v)) \cdot \vec{r_u} \times \vec{r_v}\ du\ dv
$$

We call this the flux of $\vec{F}$ through $S$.
:::

:::example
Given, $\vec{F} = \langle z, y, x \rangle$, find the flux of this vector field across the unit sphere.

So, we have the surface:
$$
S = \{(x, y, z) | x^2 + y^2 + z^2 \leq 1 \}
$$

As always, good idea to change into polar coordinates, so a good parameterization is:
$$
\vec{r}(\phi, \theta) = \langle sin(\phi)\ cos(\theta), sin(\phi)\ sin(\theta), cos(\phi) \rangle \ | \ 0 \leq \phi \leq \pi, 0 \leq \theta \leq 2\pi
$$

NB: This computation is just tedious (and we'll see how we can reduce this shortly)

$$
\vec{r_u} \times \vec{r_v} = \langle sin^2(\phi)\ cos(\theta), sin^2(\phi)\ sin(\theta), sin(\phi)\ cos(\phi) \rangle
$$

Now, one can solve this integral by taking the dot product and applying our definition:
$$
\int_0^{2\pi} \int_0^{\pi} \langle cos(\phi), sin(\phi)\ sin(\theta), sin(\phi)\ cos(\theta) \rangle \cdot  \langle sin^2(\phi)\ cos(\theta), sin^2(\phi)\ sin(\theta), sin(\phi)\ cos(\phi) \rangle
$$

Let's see now how we can do the same example, with fewer computations, first some theory.
:::

### Orientation
For surfaces, we say that positive orientation is "pointing outwards". For hollow surfaces this is always the case. If our parameterization is given by a single function, then we always have the correct choice.

However, imagine half the unit sphere with a filled base. The base with parameterization: $D = \{(r, \theta) | 0 \leq r \leq 1, 0 \leq \theta \leq 2\pi \}$. Is going to be a negative integral.

:::definition[Divergence]
For a vector field, $\vec{F}: \mathbb{R}^3 \rarr \mathbb{R}^3$, the **divergence** is:
$$
div\ \vec{F} = \dfrac{\partial P}{\partial x} + \dfrac{\partial Q}{\partial y} + \dfrac{\partial R}{\partial z}
$$
:::

:::theorem[The Divergence Theorem]
Let $S$ be a hollow surface and let $E$ be the 3-dimensional region it surrounds ($\partial E = S$).

Then:
$$
\iint_S \vec{F} \cdot dS = \iiint_E div\ \vec{F}\ dV
$$

Equivalently:
$$
\iint_{\partial E} \vec{F} \cdot dS = \iiint_E div\ \vec{F}\ dV
$$
:::

Now let's take the sample example.

:::example
Find the flux of $\vec{F} = \langle z, y, x$ on the unit sphere.
$$
div\ \vec{F} = \dfrac{\partial P}{\partial x} + \dfrac{\partial Q}{\partial y} + \dfrac{\partial R}{\partial z} = 0 + 0 + 1 = 1
$$

$$
\iint_S \vec{F} \cdot dS = \iiint_E 1 dV
$$

We could now just transform to polar coordinates, but, this is the volume of the unit sphere, which is just:
$$
\boxed{\dfrac{4\pi}{3}}
$$
:::

### Stokes' Theorem
So far we have seen Green's Theorem as well as The Divergence theorem. But what is the reason that Green's Theorem only works in $\mathbb{R}^3$?

Well, Stokes Theorem is essentially Green's Theorem but in $\mathbb{R}^3$.

:::definition[Curl]
For $\vec{F}: \mathbb{R}^3 \rarr \mathbb{R}^3$, we define its **curl** as:

NB: it is also called **rot** and sometimes denoted as $\nabla \times \vec{F}$.
$$
curl\ \vec{F} = \langle \dfrac{\partial R}{\partial y} - \dfrac{\partial Q}{\partial z}, \dfrac{\partial P}{\partial z} - \dfrac{\partial R}{\partial x}, \dfrac{\partial Q}{\partial x} - \dfrac{\partial P}{\partial y} \rangle
$$
:::

:::theorem[Stokes' Theorem]
If $S \subset \mathbb{R}^3$ is a surface, surrounded by a simple, closed curve in $\mathbb{R}^3$. Then:
$$
\int_C \vec{F} \cdot dr = \iint_S curl\ F\ dS
$$
:::

:::example
Compute $\int_C F \cdot dr$ for $\vec{F} = \langle -y^2, x, z^2 \rangle$ and $C$ being the intersection of $y + z = 2$ with $x^2 + y^1 = 1$.

Let's find the curl:
$$
curl\ \vec{F} = \langle 0, 0, 1 + 2y \rangle
$$

We need to find the surface, the intersection of $y + z = 2$ and $x^2 + y^2 = 1$ will just be the unit disk but at a slight tilt.

$$
\iint_S curl\ \vec{F}\ dS
$$

Is just the flux through this region, let's express this in polar coordinates
$$
D = \{(r, \theta) | 0 \leq r \leq 1, 0 \leq \theta \leq 2\pi \}
$$

Meaning:
$$
\iint_S curl\ \vec{F}\ dS = \iint_D curl\ \vec{F} \cdot \vec{r_u} \times \vec{r_v}\ dA
$$

Let's find a parameterization of the surface:
$$
\vec{r}(u, v)  = \langle u, v, 2 - v \rangle
$$

$$
\vec{r_u}(u, v)  = \langle 1, 0, 0 \rangle
$$

$$
\vec{r_v}(u, v)  = \langle 0, 1, -1 \rangle
$$

$$
\vec{r_u} \times \vec{r_v}  = \langle 0, 1, 1 \rangle
$$

$$
\iint_D curl\ \vec{F} \cdot \vec{r_u} \times \vec{r_v}\ dA = \iint_D \langle 0, 0, 1 + 2y \rangle \cdot \langle 0, 1, 1 \rangle\ dA
$$

$$
\iint_D 1 + 2y\ dA
$$

$$
\int_0^{2\pi} \int_0^1 (1 + 2r sin(\theta))r\ dr\ d\theta
$$

$$
\int_0^{2\pi} \int_0^1 r + 2r^2 sin(\theta)\ dr\ d\theta
$$

$$
\int_0^1 \int_0^{2\pi}  r + 2r^2 sin(\theta)\ d\theta\ dr
$$

$sin(\theta)$ has symmetry around $2\pi$, therefore the integral of that is $0$.

$$
\int_0^1 2\pi r\ dr = \boxed{\pi}
$$
:::

:::example
Compute $\iint_S curl\ \vec{F}\ dS$ where $\vec{F} = \langle xz, yz, xy \rangle$ and $S$ is the part of the sphere of radius 2 around $(0, 0, 0)$ that lies inside the cylinder $x^2 + y^2 \leq 1$ and above the $xy$-plane.

Let's actually use Stokes theorem, "backwards". $C$ will be a circle with:
$$
\begin{cases}
x^2 + y^2 = 1 \newline
x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = 4 \newline
\end{cases}
$$

Which means that $z = \sqrt{3}$

We can parameterize this curve as:
$$
\vec{r}(t) = \langle cos(t), sin(t), \sqrt{3} \rangle \ | \ 0 \leq t \leq 2\pi
$$

$$
\vec{r^\prime}(t) = \langle -sin(t), cos(t), 0 \rangle
$$

$$
\iint_S curl\ \vec{F}\ dS = \int_C \vec{F} \cdot dr
$$

$$
\int_0^{2\pi} \langle \sqrt{3} cos(t), \sqrt{3} sin(t), cos(t)\ sin(t) \rangle \cdot \langle -sin(t), cos(t), 0 \rangle
$$

$$
\int_0^{2\pi} -\sqrt{3} cos(t)\ sin(t) + \sqrt{3} sin(t)\ cos(t)
$$

$$
\int_0^{2\pi} 0 = \boxed{0}
$$
:::
