---
title: "Part 6 - Maximum and minimum values"
date: 2023-09-08
math: true
school: [mathematical analysis in several variables]
---

### Introduction
In this part we'll cover how we find maximum and minimum values for a function, we'll also see how this is related to the 2nd derivative.

### Maximum and minimum values
Let's first recall how we define maximum and minimum values for functions of one variable.

:::definition[Local and absolute extrema]
For maximum:

A function of one variable has local maximum at $a$, if $f(a) \geq f(x)$ when $x$ is near $a$.

For minimum:
A function of one variable has local minimum at $a$, if $f(a) \leq f(x)$ when $x$ is near $a$.

Similarly, for two variables:
A function of two variables has local maximum at $(a, b)$ if $f(a, b) \geq f(x, y)$ when $(x, y)$ is near $(a, b)$.

A function of two variables has local minimum at $(a, b)$ if $f(a, b) \leq f(x, y)$ when $(x, y)$ is near $(a, b)$.

For **absolute** max/min, we define them as:
If $f(a, b) \geq f(x, y)$ for any $(x, y) \in D$, we have an absolute maximum.

If $f(a, b) \leq f(x, y)$ for any $(x, y) \in D$, we have an absolute minimum.
:::

How do we find these minimums and maximums?

### How to find min/max
Let's recall for functions of one variable, min/max points have derivate of zero, therefore:
$$
f'(a) = 0 \ | \ f'(a) \ \exists
$$

For two variables, this is the same:

::::theorem
If a function of two variables has local min/max at $(a, b)$, then $f_x(a, b) = 0$ and $f_y(a, b) = 0$ given that $f_x(a, b)$ and $f_y(a, b)$ exists.
:::proof
Let $(a, b)$ be a point of local maximum and $f_x(a, b)$ and $f_y(a, b)$ exists. $f(a, b) \geq f(x, y)$ when $(x, y)$ near $(a, b)$.

In particular, take y = b:
$$
f(a, b) = f(x, b) \ | \ x \text{ near } a
$$

Let $g(x) = f(x, b)$, this means:
$$
g(a) = f(a, b)
$$

We can say that $a$ is a point of local maximum:
$$
g'(a) = 0
$$

Which is just the same as:
$$
f_x(a, b) = 0
$$

Similarly, for $f_y(a, b) = 0$, we just choose to fix $x = a$ instead.
:::
::::

### Geometrical sense
In functions of one variable, at points of local min/max, the tangent line is horizontal to our point, if the line exists.

For functions of two variables, instead of a line, we have a plane. The tangent plane is horizontal to our point, if the plane exists.

Let's properly define what we've covered so far:

:::definition[Critical point]
$(a, b)$ is a **critical point** if $\nabla f(a, b) = 0 \textbf{ or } \nabla f(a, b) \ \nexists$
:::

In other words, if $(a, b)$ is a critical point of local minimum/maximum then it is a critical point.

However, the other way around this implication is not true. A critical point might not be a local minimum/maxium.

:::example
Find the critical point(s) for the function:
$$
f(x, y) = x^2 + y^2 - 2x - 6y + 14
$$

Let's use our definition:
$$
\nabla f = 0 \newline
\langle 2x - 2, 2y - 6 \rangle = 0
$$

We find that $x = 1$ and $y = 3$. This means $(1, 3)$ is a critical point (and the only one!).
:::

But how do we actually know if a critical point is a local minimum or maximum?

### 2nd derivate test
For functions of one variable, if we do the 2nd derivate test:

Suppose $a$ is a point and $f''(a)$ exists, then:
$$
f''(a) > 0 \ | \ \text{local min} \newline
f''(a) < 0 \ | \ \text{local max} \newline
f''(a) = 0 \ | \ \text{does not say anything}
$$

Let's see what we can do in functions of two variables.

:::theorem[2nd derivate test for functions of two variables]
Suppose $(a, b)$ is a critical point of a function, $f$, of two variables. Suppose 2nd order partial derivatives exists and are continous.

Let $D = D(a, b) = f_{xx}(a, b) f_{yy}(a,b) - \left(f_{xy} (a,b)\right)^2$

Then:
$$
D > 0 \text{ and } f_{xx}(a, b) > 0 \ | \ \text{local minimum} \newline
D > 0 \text{ and } f_{xx}(a, b) < 0 \ | \ \text{local maximum} \newline
D < 0 \ | \ \text{neither, this is a saddle point} \newline
$$
:::

:::example
Let $f(x, y) = x^2 - y^2$ Find critical point(s):

$$
\nabla f = 0 \newline
\langle 2x, -2y \rangle = 0
$$

This means $(0, 0)$ is a critical point:
$$
f_{xx} = 2
f_{yy} = -2
f_{xy} = 0
$$

This means:
$$
D = -4 \ | \ \text{saddle point}
$$
:::

Let's take one last example

:::example
Find local min/max/saddle points, $f(x, y) = x^4 + y^4 - 4xy + 1$

$$
\nabla f = 0
\langle 4x^3 - 4y, 4y³ - 4x \rangle = 0
$$

$$
\begin{cases}
4x^3 - 4y = 0 \newline
4y^3 - 4x = 0
\end{cases}
$$

Solving this equation system we find that:
$$
\begin{cases}
x = 0 \newline
x = \pm 1
\end{cases}
$$
$$
\begin{cases}
y = 0 \newline
y = \pm 1
\end{cases}
$$

Let's now find the 2nd order partial derivates:

$$
f_{xx} = 12x^2 \newline
f_{yy} = 12y^2 \newline
f_{xy} = f_{yx} = -4
$$

$$
D = 144x^2y^2 - 16
$$

$$
\begin{cases}
D(0, 0) = -16 \ | \ \text{saddle point} \newline
D(1, 1) = 128 \ | \ \text{local minimum} \newline
D(-1, -1) = 128 \ | \ \text{local minimum} \newline
\end{cases}
$$
:::
