---
title: "Part 2 - Continuity & partial derivatives."
date: 2023-08-30T10:53:01+02:00
math: true
school: [mathematical analysis in several variables]
---

### Introduction
In this part we'll define continuity when dealing with functions with several variables. We'll also start looking at derivatives of functions of several variables.

### Continuity
Let's recall what continuity of a function with one variable is defined:

:::recall[Continuity in one variable]
A function of one variable is *continuous* at a point, $a \in D$ if:
$$
\lim_{x \to a} f(x) = f(a)
$$
:::

In functions with several variables, it's the same:
$$
\lim_{(x, y) \to (a, b)} f(x, y) = f(a, b)
$$

We say $f$ is continuous on *its domain*, if $f$ is continuous at each point, $(a, b) \in D$

### Continuity laws
Suppose $f and g$ are functions of two variables. $h$, is a function of one variable. Which are continuous in their respective domains, then:

$$
f \pm g
$$

$$
f \cdot g
$$

$$
\left(\dfrac{f}{g}\right)
$$

$$
h(f(x, y))
$$

All of the above, are continuous on their domains.

:::example
$$
f(x, y) = x  \ | \ \text{ is continuous at $\mathbb{R}^2$}
$$

Proof:
$$
\lim_{(x, y) \to (a, b)} f(x, y) = f(a, b) = a
$$

$$
\text{Using the limit law: } \lim_{(x, y) \to (a, b)} x = a
$$

Similarly $f(x, y) = y$ is continuous at $\mathbb{R}^2$.

$$
f(x, y) = x^3y - y^2 + x \ | \ \text{ is continuous at $\mathbb{R}^2$}
$$

Proof:
Since polynomials are combinations of $f(x, y) = x$ and $f(x, y) = y$, using continuity laws (or limit laws), we can easily prove this.

$$
f(x, y) = \dfrac{x^3 y^3 - x^4y}{y - x} \ | \ \text{ is continuous \textbf{on its domain}}
$$

The domain of $f$ is:
$$
\{(x, y) \ | \ y - x \neq 0 \}
$$

$$
f(x, y) = e^{x^2 - y} \ | \ \text{ is continuous at $\mathbb{R}^2$}
$$

Using the composition law of continuity, we easily prove that this function is a continuous function, **on its domain**. In this case it's still $\mathbb{R}^2$.

Knowing whether a function is continuous or not is very powerful, knowing that the above function is continuous makes:

$$
\lim_{(x, y) \to (a, b)} e^{x^2 - y} = e^{1^2 - 3} = \boxed{e^{-2}}
$$

Trivial.
:::

:::example
Determine if this function is continuous:
$$
f(x, y) =
\begin{cases}
\dfrac{xy^2}{x^2 + 3y^4} & (x, y) \neq (0,0) \newline
0  & (x, y) = (0, 0)
\end{cases}
$$

Solution:
If the function is continuous, using the definition, then:
$$
\lim_{(x, y) \to (a, b)} f(x, y) = f(a, b)
$$

which means:
$$
\lim_{(x, y) \to (0, 0)} f(x, y) = f(0, 0) = 0
$$

$$
\lim_{(x, y) \to (0, 0)} \dfrac{xy^2}{x^2 + 3y^4} = 0
$$

Using the law of limits and the definition, we find that this limit does not exist since:

Along $x = 0$
$$
\dfrac{xy^2}{x^2 + 3y^4} = \dfrac{0}{3y^4} = 0
$$

Along $x = y^2$
$$
\dfrac{xy^2}{x^2 + 3y^4} = \dfrac{y^4}{y^4 + 3y^4} = \dfrac{1}{4}
$$

Which tells us that $f(x, y)$ is not continuous at $(0, 0)$.
:::

:::example
$$
f(x, y) =
\begin{cases}
\dfrac{x^4 - y^4}{x^2 + y^2} & (x, y) \neq (0,0) \newline
0  & (x, y) = (0, 0)
\end{cases}
$$

$$
\lim_{(x, y) \to (0, 0)} \dfrac{x^4 - y^4}{x^2 + y^2} = 0
$$

$$
\begin{align*}
\lim_{(x, y) \to (0, 0)} \dfrac{x^4 - y^4}{x^2 + y^2} & = \newline
\lim_{(x, y) \to (0, 0)} \dfrac{(x^2 + y^2)(x^2 - y^2)}{x^2 + y^2} & = \newline
\lim_{(x, y) \to (0, 0)} (x^2 - y^2) & = \newline
\boxed{0}
\end{align*}
$$

Which means it is continuous at $(0, 0)$.
:::

### Partial derivatives
Let's first start with recalling the definition of derivative for functions with one variable:
$$
\lim_{h \to 0} \dfrac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h}
$$

Since we're dealing with several variables, we need to choose *what variable to respect*, meaning what variable has a small increase.

:::definition[Partial derivative]
The *partial* derivate of a function of two variables **with respect to** x, denoted by $f_x$, is the function of two variables given by:
$$
f_x(x, y) = \lim_{h \to 0} \dfrac{f(x + h, y) - f(x, y)}{h}
$$

Similarly for $y$:
$$
f_y(x, y) = \lim_{h \to 0} \dfrac{f(x, y + h) - f(x, y)}{h}
$$
:::

In other words what this means, the partial derivate with respect to a variable, we treat all other variables as they were constants.

:::example
$$
f(x, y) = x^2y + y^3
$$

$$
f_x(x, y) = 2xy
$$

$$
f_y(x, y) = x^2 + 3y^2
$$

$$
f(x, y) = sin(x^2y - 3x)
$$

$$
f_x(x, y) = cos(x^2y - 3x) \cdot (2xy - 3) \ | \ \text{chain rule}
$$

$$
f_y(x, y) = cos(x^2y - 3x) \cdot x^2 \ | \ \text{chain rule}
$$

$$
f(x, y, z) = x^2z + xy - 7yz^5
$$

$$
f_z(x, y, z) = x^2 - 35yz^4
$$
:::

### Summary
As we have seen continuity is quite similar when dealing with functions of several variables. The *partial* derivate of functions of several variables are also quite trivial since we treat the other variables as constants!
