---
title: "Part 9 - General controller structure"
date: 2023-11-23
math: true
school: [control theory]
---
### Introduction
In this part we'll see how we define a general feedback loop.

### General controller structure
Assume the general structure for a feedback loop.

However, we now have some noise that is added (in theory the sign can be whatever) to our out signal. Additionally, the noise, $V(s)$ will go through a process, $G_v(s)$.

Along with this noise we have some noise in the feedback loop as well, so-called measurement error. We'll call the new feedback signal for $Y_m = Y(s) - W(s)$, where $W(s)$ is the extra noise.

Mathematically we will describe this as:
$$
\begin{align*}
E(s) & = R(s) - Y_m(s) \newline
& = R(s) - (Y(s) - W(s))  \newline
& = R(s) - Y(s) + W(s)
\end{align*}
$$

$$
Y(s) = G_v(s)V(s) + F(s)G(s) [R(s) - Y(s) + W(s)] \newline
Y(s) = G_v(s)V(s) + F(s)G(s)R(s) - F(s)G(s)Y(s) + F(s)G(s)W(s) \newline
Y(s) + F(s)G(s)Y(s) = G_v(s)V(s) + F(s)G(s)R(s) + F(s)G(s)W(s) \newline
Y(s)(1 + F(s)G(s)) = G_v(s)V(s) + F(s)G(s)R(s) + F(s)G(s)W(s) \newline
Y(s)(1 + L(s)) = G_v(s)V(s) + L(s)R(s) + L(s)W(s) \newline
Y(s) = \dfrac{1}{1 + L(s)} G_v(s)V(s) + \dfrac{L(s)}{1 + L(s)} R(s) + \dfrac{L(s)}{1 + L(s)} W(s) \newline
$$

:::definition[Sensitivity functions]
Let's denote $\dfrac{1}{1 + L(s)}$ as $S(s)$, weird notation, but let's go with it.
Let's denote $\dfrac{L(s)}{1 + L(s)}$ as $T(s)$.

We call $S(s)$ for the sensitivity function. $T(s)$ is called for the complementary sensitivity function.
:::

Meaning that:
$$
S(s) + T(s) = 1 \ | \ \text{Not hard to see}
$$

We also have a name for $\dfrac{G_v(s)}{1 + L(s)} = G_v(s) S(s)$, noise-sensitivity function.

What is the error in $E(s)$?

The impact from $R(s)$ of the overall error is found by setting $V(s) = 0, W(s) = 0$

If we wanted to know the impact from $V(s)$ we set the others to 0.

$$
\begin{align*}
E(s) & = R(s) - Y(s) \newline
& = R(s) - T(s)R(s)
& = R(s)(1 - T(s))
& = R(s)S(s)
\end{align*}
$$

If we want $y(t)$ to follow $r(t)$, $S(s)$ needs to be small, which is equivalent to saying $T(s)$ should be "large".

Let's do an actual example now.

:::example
We have a car system, where $y(t)$ is velocity of the car. $F_d(t)$ is a traction force. $u(t)$ is throttle.

In the $s$-domain we have:
$$
Y(s) = \dfrac{5}{1 + 5s} F_d(s)
$$

$$
F_d(s) = \dfrac{0.1}{1 + s}U(s)
$$

$$
U(s) = \dfrac{(1 + s)F_d(s)}{0.1}
$$

The car has a cruise control - this is a feedback loop with a PI-controller.
$$
F(s) = K_p \cdot \dfrac{1 + T_i s}{T_i s}
$$

We know that the transfer function from throttle $\rarr$ velocity is:
$$
G(s) = \dfrac{Y(s)}{U(s)} = \dfrac{\dfrac{5}{1 + 5s} F_d(s)}{\dfrac{(1 + s)F_d(s)}{0.1}} = \dfrac{0.5}{(1 + 5s)(1 + s)}
$$

The loop transfer function is therefore:
$$
L(s) = F(s)G(s) = K_p \cdot \dfrac{1 + T_i s}{T_i s} \cdot \dfrac{0.5}{(1 + 5s)(1 + s)}
$$

If we choose a time constant, such as $T_i = 5$, we get:
$$
L(s) = F(s)G(s) = \dfrac{0.1K_p}{s(1 + s)}
$$

Let's study $S(s)$ and $T(s)$ now.

$$
S(s) = \dfrac{1}{1 + L(s)} = \dfrac{1}{1 + \dfrac{0.1K_p}{s(1 + s)}} = \dfrac{s(1 + s)}{s(1 + s) + 0.1K_p} = \dfrac{s^2 + s}{s^2 + s + 0.1K_p}
$$

$$
T(s) = \dfrac{L(s)}{1 + L(s)} = \dfrac{\dfrac{0.1K_p}{s(1 + s)}}{1 + \dfrac{0.1K_p}{s(1 + s)}} = \dfrac{0.1K_p}{s(1 + s) + 0.1K_p} = \dfrac{0.1K_p}{s^2 + s + 0.1K_p}
$$

We can view this as a second-order system.
$$
\omega_n = \sqrt{0.1K_p}
$$

$$
\zeta = \dfrac{1}{2 \omega_n} = \dfrac{1}{2 \sqrt{0.1K_p}}
$$
:::
