---
title: "Part 4 - Models for mechanical systems"
date: 2023-11-06
math: true
school: [control theory]
---
### Introduction
In this part we'll see how we can model mechanical systems with controls.

### Models for mechanical systems
In this series we'll mainly deal with springs and dampers. Mainly translation motion.

For springs, we'll of course use Hooke's law:
$$
F_s = ky
$$

Where $k$ is the spring constant in $\left[\dfrac{N}{m}\right]$.

For dampers, we'll use:
$$
F_y = b \dot{y}
$$

Where $b$ is the damping constant in $\left[\dfrac{Ns}{m}\right]$.

:::example[Mass-spring-damper model]
Imagine we have a mass attached to both a spring and damper.

We have a downward force called $F_d$. Assume the system is rest at the start, using Newton's second law:
$$
F = m\ddot{y}
$$

$$
F_d - ky - b\dot{y} = m\ddot{y}
$$

$$
F_d = m\ddot{y} + ky + b\dot{y}
$$

Now we have a second-order differential equation that describes the system. Lets Laplace transform it and find its transfer function from $F_d \to y$.

Meaning $G_{F_dy}(s) = \dfrac{Y(s)}{F_d(s)}$

$$
F_d(s) = ms^2 Y(s) + kY(s) + bs Y(s)
$$

$$
F_d(s) = Y(s) (ms^2 + bs + k)
$$

$$
\boxed{G_{F_{dy}}(s) = \dfrac{Y(s)}{F_d(s)} = \dfrac{1}{ms^2 + bs + k}}
$$
:::

:::example[Tank system]
Given a tank system, we can write using Bernoulli's equation as:
$$
P_1 + \rho g h_1 + \dfrac{\rho v_1^2}{2} = P_2 + \rho g h_2 + \dfrac{\rho v_2^2}{2}
$$

Let $q_out$ and $q_in$ be volume flow. Let $h_2 = 0$, $P_1 = P_2 = P$ and that $v_1 \approx 0$.

This yields:
$$
\rho g h_1 = \dfrac{\rho v_2^2}{2}
$$

$$
v_2 = \sqrt{2gh_1}
$$

We define $q_out$ with $q_{out}= a \cdot v$, where $a$ is the area.
$$
q_{out} = a \sqrt{2gh_1} = a \sqrt{2g} \cdot \sqrt{h_1} \ | \ \text{non-linear}
$$

Let $V = A \cdot h_1$. This means that $\dot{V}$ is the rate of change of the volume per second. $\dot{V} = q_{in} - q_{out}$.

Which means:
$$
A\dot{h} = q_{in} - q_{out}
$$

$$
\dot{h} = \dfrac{1}{A}(q_{in} - q_{out})
$$

$$
\dot{h} = \dfrac{1}{A}(q_{in} - a \sqrt{2g} \cdot \sqrt{h_1})
$$
:::

In the next part, we'll see how we can linearize this function to obtain the so-called space-state representation of this system.
