---
title: "Part 3 - Controllers in the Laplace domain"
date: 2023-11-05
math: true
school: [control theory]
---
### Introduction
In this part we'll define controllers in the Laplace domain.

Let's firstly cover feedback again.

### $N$th-Order systems
In controls, we'll often study system which can be described with differential equations. A $N$th-order system means we can describe said system with a $N$th-order differential equation.

We also say that the transfer function has degree $N$.

### Feedback system
Let's find the general transfer function for a feedback system, from $r(t)$ to $y(t)$.

* $G(s)$ - System/Process
* $F(s)$ - Controller
* $R(s)$ - Reference value
* $U(s)$ - Input signal
* $Y(s)$ - Output signal
* $E(s)$ - Control error = R(s) - Y(s)

Let $G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{Y(s)}{R(s)}$

$$
Y(s) = G(s) U(s)
$$

We know that:
$$
U(s) = F(s) E(s)
$$

$$
E(s) = R(s) - Y(s)
$$

Therefore:
$$
U(s) = F(s)(R(s) - Y(s))
$$

$$
U(s) = F(s)R(s) - F(s)Y(s)
$$

Therefore:
$$
Y(s) = G(s)(F(s)R(s) - F(s)Y(s))
$$

$$
Y(s) = G(s)F(s)R(s) - G(s)F(s)Y(s)
$$

$$
Y(s) + G(s)F(s)Y(s) = G(s)F(s)R(s)
$$

$$
Y(s)(1 + G(s)F(s)) = G(s)F(s)R(s)
$$

Therefore:
$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{G(s)F(s)}{1 + G(s)F(s)}
$$

Let's denote $G(s)F(s)$ as $L(s)$.
$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{L(s)}{1 + L(s)}
$$

This describes the relation between $r(t)$ and $y(t)$ and their stability.

### Feedback system
Pros:

* $y(t)$ can be equal to $r(t)$ (with the right controller).
* Can compensate for interference

Cons:
* Can be **unstable**

:::definition[Zeros and poles]
$G_{ry}(s)$ can be written as:

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{B(s)}{A(s)}
$$

The zeros are given by the equation $B(s) = 0$.

The poles are given by the equation $A(s)$.
:::

We'll see later on how zeros and the poles affect the stability of a system.

### Controllers in Laplace
* P-controller - $u(t) = K_p\ e(t)$
* I-controller - $u(t) = K_i\ \int_0^t e(\tau)\ d\tau$
* PI-controller - $u(t) = K_p\ e(t) + K_i \int_0^t e(\tau)\ d\tau$

In Laplace:
* P-controller - $U(s) = K_p\ E(s)$
* I-controller - $U(s) = K_i\ \dfrac{1}{s}\ E(s)$
* PI-controller - $U(s) = K_p\ E(s) + \dfrac{K_i}{s}\ E(s)$

Let's rewrite the PI controller a bit:
$$
\begin{align*}
U(s) & = K_p\ E(s) + \dfrac{K_i}{s}\ E(s) \newline
& = E(s) \left(K_p + \dfrac{K_i}{s}\right) \newline
& = E(s) \left(K_p\left(1 + \dfrac{K_i}{K_p} + \dfrac{1}{s}\right)\right) \newline
& = E(s) \left(K_p\left(1 + \dfrac{1}{T_i \cdot s}\right)\right) \newline
& = E(s) \left(K_p \cdot \dfrac{1 + T_i \cdot s}{T_i \cdot s} \right)
\end{align*}
$$

Where $T_i = \dfrac{K_p}{K_i}$

:::example[Car with engine dynamics]
Let's add some engine dynamics:

$$
F_d(s) = \dfrac{K_u}{1 + T_u \cdot S} \cdot U(s)
$$

Car dynamic:
$$
G_{car}(s) = \dfrac{K}{1 + sT} = \dfrac{1}{ms + b}
$$

From the differential equation (just like last time) we get:
$$
Y(s)(ms + b) = \dfrac{K_u}{1 + T_u \cdot s} \cdot U(s)
$$

Let's find transfer function from $U(s) \to Y(s)$.

$$
G_{uy}(s) = \dfrac{Y(s)}{U(s)}
$$

$$
G_{uy}(s) = \dfrac{K_u}{(ms + b)(1 + T_u\ s)}
$$

Given some values:
* $m = 10^3\ kg$
* $b = 200\ \dfrac{Ns}{m}$
* $K_u = 10k\ \dfrac{N}{rad}$
* $T_u = 1\ sec$

$$
G_{uy}(s) = \dfrac{10^3}{(10^3s + 200)(1 + s)} = \ldots = \boxed{\dfrac{50}{(1 + 5s)(1 + s)}}
$$
:::

### P-controller
Say that our controller was a P-controller.

Let's find $G_{ry}(s)$.

$L(s) = K_p \cdot G_{uy}(s)$

$$
L(s) = \dfrac{50K_p}{(1 + 5s)(1 +s)}
$$

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{\dfrac{50K_p}{(1 + 5s)(1 +s)}}{1 + \dfrac{50K_p}{(1 + 5s)(1 +s)}}
$$

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{50K_p}{(1 + 5s)(1 + s) + 50K_p}
$$

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{10K_p}{s^2 + \dfrac{6}{5}s + \dfrac{1}{5} + 10K_p}
$$

### Gradually increasing reference value
Say that we have $r(t) = r_0 \cdot \sigma(t)$

This means:
$$
R(s) = \dfrac{r_0}{s}
$$

Let's study $y(\infty)$.

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} sY(s)
$$

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} s \cdot G_{ry}(s) \cdot R(s)
$$

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} s \cdot \dfrac{10K_p}{s^2 + \dfrac{6}{5}s + \dfrac{1}{5} + 10K_p} \cdot \dfrac{r_0}{s}
$$

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} \dfrac{10K_p}{\dfrac{1}{5} + 10K_p} \cdot r_0
$$

Thus
$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} \dfrac{10K_p}{\dfrac{1}{5} + 10K_p} \cdot r_0 < r_0
$$

This means that, a P-controller will never be enough for a system to get an output that is exactly the same as the reference value.

Let's see how a PI-controller behaves.

:::example[PI-controller]
If we use the same system.

$G_{ry}(s)$ is a 2nd order transfer function. (The denominator is a polynomial of degree 2).

The general formula for 2nd order transfer functions can be written as:
$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{K \omega^2_n}{s^2 + 2 \zeta \omega_n s + \omega^2_n}
$$

Where:
* $\omega_n$ - Natural frequency
* $K$- Gain
* $\zeta$ - Damping ratio

So, in the case $G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{10K_p}{s^2 + \dfrac{6}{5}s + \dfrac{1}{5} + 10 K_p}$

We can rewrite it with:
$$
\omega_n = \sqrt{0.2 + 10 K_p} \newline
K = \dfrac{10K_p}{0.2 + 10 K_p} \newline
\zeta = \dfrac{1.2}{2\ \sqrt{0.2 + 10 K_p}}
$$

Back to the PI-controller example.

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{L(s)}{1 + L(s)}
$$

We know that:
$$
L(s) = F(s) G(s)
$$

We know:
$$
F(s) = K_p \left(\dfrac{1 + T_i s}{T_i s} \right) \newline
G(s) = \dfrac{50}{(1 + 5s)(1 + s)}
$$

From $G(s)$ we can see that we have two poles. One pole is "fast", $T = 1\ sec$ $(1 + s)$. The other "slow", $T = 5\ sec$ $(1 + 5s)$.

If we choose $T_i = 5\ sec$, then:
$$
F(s) = K_p \left(\dfrac{1 + 5s}{5s} \right) \newline
$$

Which means:
$$
L(s) = K_p \left(\dfrac{1 + 5s}{5s} \right) \dfrac{50}{(1 + 5s)(1 + s)}
$$

$$
L(s) = \dfrac{50 K_p}{(5s)(1 + s)}
$$

Which means:
$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{L(s)}{1 + L(s)}
$$

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{\dfrac{50 K_p}{(5s)(1 + s)}}{1 + \dfrac{50 K_p}{(5s)(1 + s)}}
$$

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{50 K_p}{(5s)(1 + s) + 50 K_p}
$$

$$
G_{ry}(s) = \dfrac{10 K_p}{s^2 + s + 10 K_p}
$$

If we now study:
$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} s \cdot Y(s)
$$

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} s \cdot G_{ry}(s) R(s)
$$

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} s \cdot \dfrac{10 K_p}{s^2 + s + 10 K_p} \cdot \dfrac{r_0}{s}
$$

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} \dfrac{10 K_p}{s^2 + s + 10 K_p} \cdot r_0
$$

$$
\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = \lim_{s \to 0} \dfrac{10 K_p}{10 K_p} \cdot r_0
$$

$$
\boxed{\lim_{t \to \infty} y(t) = r_0}
$$

So, we see that a PI-controller gets us exactly the reference value.
:::
