---
title: "Part 5 - Fourier series"
date: 2023-09-15
math: true
school: [transforms signals and systems]
---

### Introduction
In this part we'll try to understand the concept and power with Fourier series.

Let's firstly define the what, why and how with Fourier series.

:::definition[Fourier series]
Fourier series, is an expansion of a perodic function, into a sum of trigonometric functions.
:::

So the power is really, given a complex perodic function, we can easily represent it as a sum of simple trigonometric functions!

However, before we mathematically define the Fourier series, let's take a different approach to this.

### Signal representation by orthogonal signal set
<!-- pic here -->

We can see that, if we only use $c_1 x_1$ and $c_2 x_2$, we get *something* similar for $f$.

We can say that:
$$
f \sim c_1 x_1 + c_2 x_2
$$

Let's call our error, $e$.
$$
e = f - (c_1 x_1 + c_2 x_2)
$$

Therefore:
$$
f \sim c_1 x_1 + c_2 x_2 + e = c_1 x_1 + c_2 x_2 + c_3 x_3 \ | \ \text{in this case}
$$

From linear algebra we know that basis vectors are orthogonal, this means:
$$
c_i = \dfrac{f \cdot x_i}{x_i \cdot x_i} = \dfrac{1}{|x_i|^2} f \cdot x_i
$$

This is really useful, so, from what we know, we can say that.

Given a set of orthogonal real signals, $x_1(t), x_2(t), \ldots, x_N(t)$ over the interval, $[t_1, t_2]$:
$$
\int_{t1}^{t2} x_m(t)x_n(t)\ dt =
\begin{cases}
0 & m \neq n \newline
E_n & m = n
\end{cases}
$$

We can approximate, $f(t)$ over the interval, $[t_1, t_2]$ as:
$$
f(t) \sim c_1 x_1(t) + c_2 x_2(t) + \ldots \ c_N x_N(t) = \sum_{n = 1}^N c_n x_n(t)
$$

For any $c_n$ we can express it as an integral:
$$
c_n = \dfrac{\int_{t_1}^{t_2} f(t) x_n(t)\ dt}{\int_{t_1}^{t_2} x_{n}^2 (t)\ dt} = \dfrac{1}{E_n} \int_{t_1}^{t_2} f(t) x_n(t)\ dt
$$

As before, we will have an error, $e(t)$ as well:
$$
e(t) = f(t) - \sum_{n = 1}^N c_n x_n(t)
$$

We'll also have an error in the energy, defined as:
$$
E_e = \int_{t_1}^{t_2} f^2(t)\ dt - \sum_{n = 1}^N c_n^2 E_n
$$

As, $N \to \infty$, we hope that both of these go to zero.

This is the generalized Fourier series!

Let's define it properly

:::definition[Generalized Fourier series]
$$
f(t) = c_1 x_1(t) + c_2 x_2(t) + \ldots \ c_N x_N(t) = \sum_{n = 1}^N c_n x_n(t)
$$

If, $E_e \to 0$ as $N \to \infty$, the set $\{x_n(t)\}$ is a complete set on the interval $[t_1, t_2]$, for that class of $f(t)$.

$\{x_n(t)\}$ are called **basis functions** or **basis signals**.
:::

:::theorem[Parseval's Theorem]
The error energy can approach zero even though $e(t)$ is non-zero at some isolated instants.
$$
\int_{t_1}^{t^2} f^2 (t)\ dt = c_1^2 E_1 + c_2^2 E_2 + \ldots = \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} c_n^2 E_n
$$
:::

### Generalization to complex signals
In the most general case, signals are considered to be complex function.

Therefore, let's generalize further to the complex world.
$$
\int_{t1}^{t2} x_m(t)x_n^{*}(t)\ dt =
\begin{cases}
0 & m \neq n \newline
E_n & m = n
\end{cases}
$$

Where, $x_n^{*}(t)$ is the complex conjugate of, $x_n(t)$. All equations are the same essentially:
$$
f(t) = c_1 x_1(t) + c_2 x_2 + \ldots + c_i x_i(t) + \ldots
$$

$$
c_n = \dfrac{1}{E_n} \int_{t_1}^{t_2} f(t) x_n^{*}(t)\ dt
$$

### Trigonometric Fourier series
If the set, is the following: $\{1, cos \omega_0 t, cos 2\omega_0 t, \ldots, cos n\omega_0 t, \ldots ; sin \omega_0 t, sin 2\omega_0 t, \ldots, sin n\omega_0 t, \ldots \}$

This is the orthogonal complete, **trigonometric set**.

$\omega_0$ is called the fundamental frequency

$n \omega_0$ is called the $n$th harmonic.

We can call the fundamental period for, $T_0$:
$$
T_0 = \dfrac{2\pi}{\omega_0}
$$

Note that $T_0$ is the fundamental period, meaning it can be at any time instant, as long as it's a period.

$$
\int_{T_0} cos n\omega_0 t \ cos m\omega_0 t =
\begin{cases}
0 & n \neq m \newline
\dfrac{T_0}{2} & m = n \neq 0
\end{cases}
$$

$$
\int_{T_0} sin n\omega_0 t \ sin m\omega_0 t =
\begin{cases}
0 & n \neq m \newline
\dfrac{T_0}{2} & m = n \neq 0
\end{cases}
$$

$$
\int_{T_0} sin n\omega_0 t \ sin m\omega_0 t = 0 \text{ for all n and m}
$$

So:
$$
f(t) = a_0 + a_1 cos \omega_0 t + a_2 cos 2\omega_0 t + b_1 sin \omega_0 t + b_2 sin 2\omega_0 t + \ldots
$$

So:
$$
f(t) = a_0 + \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} a_n cos n\omega_0 t + b_n sin n\omega_0 t
$$

$$
a_n = \dfrac{\int_{t_1}^{t_1 + T_0} f(t)\ cos n\omega_0 t\ dt}{\int_{t_1}^{t_1 + T_0} cos^2 n\omega_0 t\ dt}
$$

$$
a_0 = \dfrac{1}{T_0} \int_{t_1}^{t_1 + T_0} f(t)\ dt
$$

$$
a_n = \dfrac{2}{T_0} \int_{t_1}^{t_1 + T_0} f(t)\ cos n\omega_0 t\ dt
$$

$$
b_n = \dfrac{2}{T_0} \int_{t_1}^{t_1 + T_0} f(t)\ sin n\omega_0 t\ dt
$$

We can write this more compactly.
$$
a_n cos n\omega_0 t + b_n sin n\omega_0 t = C_n cos(n\omega_0 t + \theta_n)
$$

Where:
$$
C_n = \sqrt{a_n^2 + b_n^2}
$$

$$
\theta_n = tan^{-1} \left(\dfrac{-b_n}{a_n}\right)
$$

So:
$$
f(t) = C_0 + \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} C_n cos(n\omega_0 t + \theta_n)
$$

### Exponential Fourier series
Given the set: $\{e^{jn\omega_0 t}\}$, with, $n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \ldots$, this is complete, orthogonal set.

Note that, $j$ here is complex.

$$
\int_{T_0} e^{jm \omega_0 t} (e^{jn\omega_0 t})^{*}\ dt = \int_{T_0} e^{j(m - n)\omega_0 t}\ dt =
\begin{cases}
0 & m \neq n \newline
T_0 & m = n
\end{cases}
$$

$$
f(t) = \sum_{-\infty}^{\infty} D_n e^{jn\omega_0 t}
$$

$$
D_n = \dfrac{1}{T_0} \int_{T_0} f(t) e^{-jn\omega_0 t}\ dt
$$

Using Euler's formula, we can switch between trigonometric and exponential series.

$$
C_n cos(n\omega_0 t + \theta_n) = \dfrac{C_n}{2} \left(e^{j(n\omega_0 t + \theta_n)} + e^{-j(n\omega_0 t + \theta_n)}\right)
$$

$$
\left(\dfrac{C_n}{2} e^{j\theta_n}\right) e^{jn\omega_0 t} + \left(\dfrac{C_n}{2} e^{-j\theta_n}\right) e^{-jn\omega_0 t}
$$

Let's introduce, $D_n$:
$$
D_n = \dfrac{1}{2} C_n e^{j\theta_n}
$$

$$
D_{-n} = \dfrac{1}{2} C_n e^{-j\theta_n}
$$

$$
f(t) = D_0 + \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} D_n e^{jn\omega_0 t} + D_{-n} e^{-jn\omega_0 t}
$$

In an even more compact form:
$$
f(t) = \sum_{-\infty}^{\infty} D_n e^{jn\omega_0 t}
$$
