---
title: "Part 6 - Fourier Transform"
date: 2023-09-20
math: true
school: [transforms signals and systems]
---

### Introduction
In this part we'll define and understand Fourier transforms. In the last part we covered the concept of Fourier series.

Which was a way of describing periodic functions as a linear combination (sum) of simple trigonometric functions. The Fourier transform takes this one step further, it's a way to extend the Fourier series of non-periodic functions.

:::definition[Fourier transform]
Given a function in the time-domain, the equivalent function in the frequency domain is:
$$
F(\omega) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) e^{-j\omega t}\ dt
$$

The other way around:
$$
f(t) = \dfrac{1}{2\pi} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} F(\omega) e^{j\omega t}\ d\omega
$$

We call these functions the Fourier pair. Meaning they are the same functions, in different domains. They represent the same signal.

$$
f(t) \iff F(\omega)
$$
:::

So the notation for the Fourier transform is:
$$
F(\omega) = \mathcal{F}[f(t)]
$$

$$
f(t) = \mathcal{F}^{-1}[F(\omega)]
$$

Let's do our first Fourier transform!

:::example
Let's do this on a simple unit gate function, let's do it on a general unit gate function.

$$
f(t) = rect\left(\dfrac{t}{\tau}\right)
$$

$$
F(\omega) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} rect\left(\dfrac{t}{\tau}\right) e^{-j\omega t}\ dt
$$

Since the gate function is only defined at $t = -\dfrac{\tau}{2}$ and $t = \dfrac{\tau}{2}$, and in this interval it is constant 1.
$$
F(\omega) = \int_{-\frac{\tau}{2}}^{\frac{\tau}{2}} e^{-j\omega t}\ dt
$$

$$
F(\omega) = -\dfrac{1}{j\omega} e^{-j\omega t} \bigg\rvert_{\frac{\tau}{2}}^{-\frac{\tau}{2}}
$$

$$
F(\omega) = -\dfrac{1}{j\omega} \left(e^{-j\omega \dfrac{\tau}{2}} - e^{j\omega t \dfrac{\tau}{2}}\right)
$$

Using Euler's formula:
$$
F(\omega) = \dfrac{2 sin\left(\dfrac{\omega \tau}{2}\right)}{\omega}
$$

Let's rewrite it as:
$$
F(\omega) = \tau \dfrac{sin\left(\dfrac{\omega \tau}{2}\right)}{\dfrac{\omega \tau}{2}}
$$

We can rewrite using $sinc(x) = \dfrac{sin(\pi x)}{\pi x}$:
$$
F(\omega) = \tau sinc\left(\dfrac{\omega \tau}{2}\right)
$$

So, this means that:
$$
rect\left(\dfrac{t}{\tau}\right) \iff \tau sinc\left(\dfrac{\omega \tau}{2}\right)
$$
:::

Now, we can do this manually each time, but that's tedious, that's why we'll usually use a Fourier table.

Let's cover some important Fourier transforms.

### Important Fourier transforms
$$
cos(\omega_0 t) \iff \pi [\delta(\omega + \omega_0) + \delta(\omega - \omega_0)]
$$

$$
sin(\omega_0 t) \iff j\pi [\delta(\omega + \omega_0) + \delta(\omega - \omega_0)]
$$

We'll use these often.

### Fourier transform properties

#### Symmetry

After we have obtained one representation of the signal, it doesn't stop us from just replacing $t$ or $\omega$ with the other.

For example:
$$
rect\left(\dfrac{t}{\tau}\right) \iff \tau sinc\left(\dfrac{\omega \tau}{2}\right)
$$

We can do:
$$
F(t) = \tau sinc\left(\dfrac{t \tau}{2}\right)
$$

We can utilize:
$$
F(t) \iff 2\pi f(-\omega)
$$

Now this means:
$$
F(t) \iff 2\pi f(-\omega) = 2\pi \ rect\left(\dfrac{-\omega}{\tau}\right)
$$

Since the unit gate function is an even function:
$$
F(t) \iff 2\pi f(-\omega) = 2\pi \ rect\left(\dfrac{\omega}{\tau}\right)
$$

#### Scaling
$$
f(at) \iff \dfrac{1}{|a|} F\left(\dfrac{\omega}{a}\right)
$$

As we can see, an expansion in the time domain, means a compression in the frequency domain and vice-versa.

From this we can also gain the time and frequency inversion property:
$$
f(-t) \iff F(-\omega)
$$

#### Time and frequency shifting
$$
f(t - t_0) \iff F(\omega) e^{-j\omega t_0}
$$

This also means:
$$
f(t) e^{j\omega_0 t} \iff F(\omega - \omega_0)
$$

#### Time differentiation and integration
$$
\dfrac{df}{dt} \iff j\omega F(\omega)
$$

$$
\int_{-\infty}^{t} f(\tau)\ d\tau \iff \dfrac{F(\omega)}{j\omega} + \pi F(0)\delta(\omega)
$$


Now, for the most powerful and beautiful property, which we'll use.

#### Convolution
Given $f_1(t) \iff F_1(\omega)$ and $f_2(t) \iff F_2(\omega)$.

Time convolution:
$$
f_1(t) * f_2(t) \iff F_1(\omega) F_2(\omega)
$$

Frequency convolution
$$
f_1(t) f_2(t) \iff \dfrac{1}{2\pi} F_1(\omega) * F_2(\omega)
$$


### Does the Fourier transform always exist?
The Fourier transform exist, if:
$$
\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} |f(t)|\ dt < \infty
$$
